Global, repeat satellite imagery serves as an essential tool to understand ecological patterns and processes over diverse temporal and spatial scales. Recently, the use of spaceborne imagery has become indispensable for monitoring giant kelp, a globally distributed foundation species that displays variable seasonal and interannual dynamics. In order to develop and maintain a continuous and spatially expansive time series, Bell et. al (2020) describe a fully automated protocol to classify giant kelp canopy biomass across three Landsat sensors. This required correcting kelp canopy estimates to account for changes in the spectral response functions between the three sensors by simulating data using hyperspectral imagery. Combining multiple sensors also necessitated the use of an extended (15 year) time series of diver estimated kelp biomass to validate each sensor. Bell et. al (2020) also describe a novel gap filling technique using known spatial scales of kelp biomass synchrony to correct for missing data due to the Enhanced Thematic Mapper Plus scan line corrector failure. These developments have led to a publicly available 34-year, seasonal time series of kelp canopy biomass across ~1500 km of California coastline.

Bell et. al (2020) then use this time series to examine the role of temporal and spatial scale on the detection of long-term biomass trends. Bell et. al (2020) found that kelp canopy biomass trends are associated with trends in low frequency marine climate oscillations, like the North Pacific Gyre Oscillation. Long-term (~20 year) increases in the state of the North Pacific Gyre Oscillation have led to a cooler, nutrient-rich environment that benefits the growth of giant kelp across a large portion of the kelp biomass time series, however recent warming events have led to weak, or nonexistent trends over the length of the time series. The cyclical nature of these low frequency marine climate oscillations complicates the detection of trends that may be associated with anthropogenic climate change. A longer and continuous time series is needed to analyze long-term canopy biomass trends outside of natural low frequency climate variability for giant kelp ecosystems along the coast of California, if Bell et. al (2020) are to make accurate assessments of the impacts of climate change.

Long-term, large area monitoring of ecosystems can help explain complex questions in ecology by comparing the dynamics of an organism or suite of organisms to variable environmental conditions, discrete disturbances, or known associations with other organisms (Nouvellon et al., 2001; Wimberly and Reilly, 2007; Meigs et al., 2011). Spaceborne sensors are a powerful tool that can generate these spatiotemporal data and provide repeat global measurements on decadal scales (Wulder et al., 2008; Loveland and Dwyer, 2012). However, since many organisms remain cryptic to observation from space, most studies have focused on large swaths of primary producers (e.g. forest canopy, grasslands, phytoplankton) to address ecosystem processes driven or affected by these species (e.g. beetle outbreaks, wildebeest migration, carbon export to the deep sea; White et al., 2005; Boone et al., 2006; Siegel et al., 2014).

Giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) is a globally distributed macroalga that serves as the foundation to an incredibly diverse and productive ecosystem on subtidal rocky reefs (Dayton, 1985). The kelp is fastened onto the reef using a holdfast and buoys fronds to the surface, where it forms a thick floating canopy that can be contiguous for many kilometers in extent. The resulting three-dimensional structure supports economically important fish and invertebrate species, many of which are not found on the reef without the presence of giant kelp (Graham, 2004; Miller et al., 2018). The floating biomass of the surface canopy can be quantified with high spatial resolution (≤30 m) multispectral sensors such as the Landsat satellites (Cavanaugh et al., 2011). This system is highly dynamic, as entire kelp forests can be dislodged from the reef during a single large storm, while the recruitment of new individuals to form a new forest canopy may occur within a few months (Dayton et al., 1992; Reed et al., 2006). The 16-day repeat cycle of the Landsat sensors should provide at least one seasonal observation of most giant kelp forests worldwide, allowing researchers to study the seasonal to multi-decadal dynamics of this foundation species over broad spatial scales (Bell et al., 2015a).

Giant kelp forests are subject to a variety of environmental processes that contribute to its growth, recruitment, and localized extinction over diverse time and space scales. These include seasonal wave disturbance and coastal upwelling, sea urchin grazing dynamics, and spore production and transport (Harrold and Reed, 1985; Lafferty and Behrens, 2005; Gaylord et al., 2006; Reed et al., 2008; Castorani et al., 2015, 2017). Over multiannual time scales, fluctuations in giant kelp have been related to large-scale, long-period cycles in ocean climate which can alter seawater temperature and nutrient patterns and modify the incidence of wave disturbance from storms (Dayton and Tegner, 1984; Edwards, 2004; Parnell et al., 2010; Bell et al., 2015b; Pfister et al., 2017). These climatic oscillations, such at the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO), and North Pacific Gyre Oscillation (NPGO), can have massive implications for marine ecosystems (Di Lorenzo et al., 2008). Boom and bust cycles of zooplankton, predatory and forage fish, marine mammals, and seabirds have all been linked to these large-scale climatic changes (Trillmich and Limberger, 1985; Mantua et al., 1997; Beaugrand et al., 2002; Chavez et al., 2003).

Since these low-frequency climate cycles display decadal-scale periodicity and longer scale coupling patterns, several decades of time series data of the focal species are needed to fully understand their effects or to disentangle the potential effect of anthropogenic forcing due to climate change (Henson et al., 2016; Joh and Di Lorenzo, 2017). Shorter time series (5–10 years) may show strong trends associated with periodic swings in ocean climate conditions while longer time series (> 30 years) may balance this short-scale variability to reveal weaker trends but may provide more valuable evidence for long-term change (Henson et al., 2010). The spatial scale of observation may provide clues to the scales over which these drivers act. Populations with trends over small scales (tens to hundreds of meters) may be driven by a different set of environmental forcings than the same populations over larger scales (tens to hundreds of kilometers; Borcard et al., 2004; Lamy et al., 2018). Therefore, it is useful to observe population dynamics over a range spatiotemporal scales to better understand the effect that ocean climate drivers may have.

The Landsat sensors have provided imagery suitable for the estimation of giant kelp biomass since the launch of the Thematic Mapper sensor (TM: Landsat 4/5) in 1982 and continuing uninterrupted to the current Enhanced Thematic Mapper Plus (ETM+; Landsat 7) and Operational Land Imager (OLI; Landsat 8). However, merging these sensors to create a consistent kelp canopy biomass time series presents several challenges. The spectral response functions have changed between sensors, and the signal-to-noise ratio and radiometric quantization have improved through time (Barsi et al., 2014; Roy et al., 2014). Sensor degradation, instrument noise, and response function biases can lead to subtle but important trends when comparing multiple sensors (Okin and Gu, 2015; Sulla-Menashe et al., 2016). Mechanical failures, such as the Landsat 7 ETM+ scan line corrector failure, led to missing data which must be corrected for to produce a continuous time series (Scaramuzza et al., 2004). Additionally, the consequences of working in a marine system such as the effect of tides and currents increase complexity. To address these challenges and to produce a consistent, multidecadal time series of giant kelp canopy biomass, Bell et. al (2020) address the following objectives and questions: (1) Develop a consistent kelp canopy biomass time series from the TM, ETM+, and OLI sensors by correcting for spectral differences between sensors, developing a relationship with ground-truth data, and accounting for biases due to environmental variables. (2) Develop a robust procedure for gap-filling missing data due to the ETM+ scan line corrector failure. (3) How does time series length and spatial breadth relate to long-term trends and are changes in kelp biomass evident over longer time scales?

The analysis of long-term trends is critically important to tease apart signals due to anthropogenic climate change from natural variability (Mann and Emanuel, 2006). However, recent work found that often several decades worth of data is necessary to distinguish climate change trends from natural variability in marine systems (Henson et al., 2016). In the context of recent work investigating changes in kelp abundance to climate change stressors (Hoegh-Guldberg and Bruno, 2010; Krumhansl et al., 2016; Bland, 2017), Bell et. al (2020) developed a large giant kelp canopy spatiotemporal dataset using three Landsat sensors to examine the effect of various time and space scales on long-term biomass trends. Mean temporal time series trends of different low frequency oceanographic climate oscillations were associated with similar mean temporal time series trends of kelp canopy biomass. This pattern indicates that shorter scale (10 year) periodicity and longer scale (20 year) variability of these oscillations may be driving trends in kelp biomass seen over similar temporal scales. Increasing the spatial scale of study decreased the proportion of significant biomass trends seen over the longest (34 year) scales, indicating that many long-term trends may be due to local scale, rather than regional or global scale, drivers. It is clear that a longer temporal scale time series is needed to analyze long-term canopy biomass trends outside of natural low frequency climate variability for giant kelp ecosystems along the coast of CA.

The three Landsat sensors examined in this study differ in several important respects, including radiometric quantization and signal to noise ratio. The greatest concern was associated with changes in the spectral band response functions between the TM/ETM+ and OLI sensors, which had the potential to bias kelp canopy biomass estimates. The spectral bands of the OLI sensor, although broadly comparable to the TM and ETM+ sensors, were narrowed and in particular the near infrared band was optimized to avoid the water absorption feature at 0.825 μm (Roy et al., 2014). While there are several methods for correcting for these spectral differences, including the use of a different kelp endmember for the MESMA analysis depending on the sensor, Bell et. al (2020) decided to use existing hyperspectral imagery to simulate Landsat imagery for each sensor. Bell et. al (2020) identified a nonlinear relationship between the TM/ETM+ and OLI sensors and were able to correct for this bias to standardize biomass estimates and retain the use of a consistent kelp canopy spectral endmember (Fig. 3).

The use of hyperspectral imagery also allowed for the examination of simulated imagery from each sensor without confounding variables like canopy biomass accumulation and loss or differences in environmental variables like tides and currents. Since giant kelp is one of the fastest growing organisms on Earth (frond elongation can be ≥15 cm d−1) and entire stands can be dislodged by large wave events, a level of caution should be used when comparing pixel scale biomass estimates produced even a few weeks apart. However, there are differences in the amount of visible canopy structure which occurs over the space of a few hours due to changes in tide. The influence of tide has been well studied in other coastal ecosystems like salt marshes, where increasing tidal inundation decreased the near infrared reflectance and shifted the location of the red-edge (Kearney et al., 2009; Turpie, 2013). Bell et. al (2020) found differences in patch scale canopy biomass that mirrored the differences in tidal state between the TM and ETM+ sensors (Fig. 5). If tidal state occurred randomly, this would simply lead to a greater amount of scatter when comparing the sensors. However, the 8-day difference in sensor overpass time linked with the tidal cycle during Bell et. al (2020) period of comparison, leading to a systematic bias that varied by Landsat tile. Tidal differences present an additional layer of complexity to coastal remote sensing that is akin to ‘hitting a moving target’ as portions of the landscape are periodically submerged. Bell et. al (2020) were able to account successfully for tidal state on a patch scale (Fig. 5c), however entire pixels may be lost if canopy biomass is submerged or drops below the detection limit.

Kelp fraction estimates were significantly related to diver estimated kelp variables with canopy biomass displaying the strongest relationship (Table 1). All three sensors had nearly equivalent linear relationships with the lowest coefficient of determination attributed to the OLI sensor (Table 1; Fig. 4). This is probably due to the limited variability of kelp observed at the monitoring sites since the launch of Landsat 8 in 2013. The years 2014–2016 were characterized as low biomass years due to large scale ocean warming events that prevented the formation of a thick, high biomass canopy (Reed et al., 2016). Work should continue to verify that the OLI relationship does not deviate from those of TM and ETM+ as higher canopy densities are observed. Kelp fractions were also related to frond and plant density, but the relationships with these variables were not as strong as with canopy biomass (Table 1). Since the sensor is only observing floating canopy there is bound to be a decrease in explanatory potential as one tries to infer structures that are partially or completely submerged. Furthermore, giant kelp is morphologically plastic, with traits that are strongly influenced by environmental conditions (reviewed in Graham et al., 2007). While the subsurface architecture may change drastically, the physics of canopy reflectance are likely conserved across phenotypes. These are important considerations for researchers aiming to answer population-based questions across regions while using canopy biomass as a proxy.

In order to examine the effect of temporal and spatial scale on kelp biomass temporal trends, Bell et. al (2020) analyzed the 34-year dataset as sets of progressively sized spatiotemporal series. This exercise represents a hypothetical experiment in which a researcher had started a monitoring site of varying size for any length of time, at any point in the time series. The native Landsat pixel size of 30 m was resampled to six alongshore segment scales (1 km, 2 km, 10 km, 25 km, 50 km, 100 km) in order to simulate a research sampling design of increasing scale. Kelp biomass values were summed through time inside each resampled site. The effect of temporal scale was estimated by subsetting the entire dataset into time series of progressively longer length at each site. Each hypothetical time series was started at every point in the dataset which could accommodate the number of samples in that series length, between 10 and 34 years. Significant temporal trends through time were calculated with generalized least squares regressions in order to account for temporal autocorrelation between the residuals of the model (R package nlme; Pinheiro et al., 2016). Each time series was standardized as a proportion of the maximum biomass value observed and log transformed to meet the assumptions of the model. The mean slope of each significant (p < 0.05) trend was calculated for all simulated time 

