Coastal marine environments experience a wide range of biotic and abiotic forces that can 
limit and punctuate the geographical range and abundance of species through time. Determining 
the relative strengths and nonlinear effects of these processes is vital to understanding the 
biogeographical structures of species. There has been an ongoing discussion concerning the 
relative importance of these processes in controlling the dynamics of giant kelp, Macrocystis 
pyrifera, an important structure-forming species on shallow reefs in the eastern Pacific. We 
used novel spatial time-series that span nearly three decades to determine the dominant drivers 
of giant kelp canopy biomass and the temporal and spatial scales over which they operate across 
the dominant range of the giant kelp in North America.

The spatial distributions of organisms are driven by a combination of abiotic and biotic forces. Abiotic forces include climate, physical features of the environment and resource
availability, whereas biotic forces involve the physiological
performance of individuals as well as interactions within and
between species. The influence of these processes may change
in direction and magnitude across a wide range of spatial
and temporal scales (Menge, 1976). This variability has led
to seemingly contradictory conclusions about the primary
drivers of population abundance in a number of systems
(reviewed in Power, 1992).

Marine coastal environments experience a wide range of
forces that can limit and punctuate the geographical range
of an organism through time. For example, the distributions
of two species of mussel (Mytilus edulis and Mytilus trossulus)
in the north-eastern Atlantic can be partly attributed to
physiological stress caused by aerial exposure, whereas interannual variations in ice floes can interrupt the density trends along the mussels’ range (Tam & Scrosati, 2011). Coastal
environments also experience large-scale changes in ocean
climate, which can fundamentally alter the distribution of a
species. The northward range expansion of Kellet’s whelk
(Kelletia kelletii; Herrlinger, 1981) has been attributed to
either warming sea-surface temperatures (SST), ocean circulation changes, or some combination of the two, across a biogeographical boundary, probably linked to El Nino events ~
(Zacherl et al., 2003). The complexity of the coastal environment may further complicate the mixture of drivers on a species through time.

The coastline of California, USA, spans four shallow marine biogeographical regions (Hall, 1964; Valentine, 1966; Abbott & Hollenberg, 1976; Blanchette et al., 2008), which are
marked by differences in oceanographical environments: the
Mendocinian, Montereyan, Southern Californian and Ensenadian regions. Winter storms in the North Pacific create large swell waves (> 4 m height) propagating from the
north-west, whereas summer months see a mixture of smaller significant wave heights (< 3 m) from the south and north-west (O’Reilly & Guza, 1993). The central coast of
California (Ano Nuevo to Point Conception) is more ~
exposed to westerly and north-westerly swells as a result of
its orientation, whereas the southern California mainland
coast (Point Conception to the USA/Mexico border) has a
range of wave exposures as a result of variable coastline orientations as well as the presence of the Californian Channel Islands. Coastal upwelling brings cold, nutrient-rich waters
to the coastal shelf, and is strongest in the spring along the
central coast, where nutrient-replete conditions persist for
the entire year; upwelling is less intense and more intermittent in southern California, with low nutrient levels during the summer (Huyer, 1983; McPhee-Shaw et al., 2007; Reed
et al., 2011). Large-scale low-frequency climate cycles, such
as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation and El Nino~ –Southern
Oscillation (ENSO), affect conditions on interannual
time-scales and can have large impacts on the biogeography
and structure of marine communities (Dayton et al., 1999;
Parnell et al., 2010).

The giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera (L.) C. Agardh, is a
canopy-forming macroalga that is widely distributed along
the coast of California and serves as the foundation species to
a productive ecosystem (Graham et al., 2007). Giant kelp
abundance in California is extremely dynamic. It is highly
susceptible to removal by ocean waves and it is not uncommon for entire forests to be destroyed during a single storm (Seymour et al., 1989; Graham et al., 1997; Edwards & Estes,
2006); populations are, however, highly resilient, and recovery
to a full canopy often occurs within 1–2 years after local
extinction (Reed et al., 2006). Individuals routinely attain
lengths over 20 m and under ideal conditions can elongate at
rates of 50 cm per day (Clendenning, 1971), which implies an
important role for nutrient supply to support these extreme
growth rates (Jackson, 1977; Gerard, 1982; Zimmerman &
Kremer, 1984; Stewart et al., 2009). Large areas of kelp forest
can be destroyed by grazing activities, primarily by sea urchins, which can denude large areas (Harrold & Reed, 1985), and the removal of the surface canopy by mechanized harvesters causes additional reductions in kelp biomass (Kimura & Foster, 1984; Foster & Schiel, 2010). Importantly, the processes thought to dominate the regulation of giant kelp forests can vary with location and time (e.g. Jackson, 1977;
Dayton et al., 1992, 1999; Graham et al., 1997; Edwards,
2004; Lafferty & Behrens, 2005; Parnell et al., 2010; Cavanaugh et al., 2011; Reed et al., 2011). This suggests that the interplay between regulating forces may be understood by
studying the spatial distribution of this species through time.
Recent advances in satellite image analyses allow for frequent (monthly to seasonal), long-term (25 years and
continuing), high-resolution (30 m), large-scale (continental)
observations of giant kelp canopy biomass (Cavanaugh et al.,
2011). These kelp data can be combined with spatially explicit time-series of potential drivers to quantify the effects of
these drivers on giant kelp biomass across a wide geographical region. Here, we used these data to explore how nutrients, wave disturbance, low-frequency oceanographical cycles,
human harvest and herbivory by sea urchins structure the
spatial distribution of giant kelp biomass through time,
across the species’ region of dominance on the rocky reefs of
California, USA. Our research focused on answering the following questions. (1) What are the dominant drivers of kelp
canopy biomass dynamics? (2) How does the relative importance of these drivers vary across temporal scales of seasons
to decades and spatial scales of 500 m to 1500 km?

Giant kelp canopy biomass was variable throughout the
study area with mean seasonal biomass per 500 m coastline
segment ranging between 1000 and 1.37 9 106 kg wet mass
(Fig. 1a,b). The mean coefficient of variation (CV) averaged
across all measured seasons was 1.4 for the entire study
region and rarely dropped below 1 in any 500-m coastline
segment, demonstrating the high variability of giant kelp
canopy biomass during the 25-year study period (Fig. 1c).
Marked spatial differences in CV were found between different sides of islands and between protected and exposed areas
on the mainland. The study region supported a mean kelp
canopy biomass of 1.39 x 10^8 kg, which ranged from a
maximum of 4.14 x 10^8 kg in the autumn of 2005 to a
minimum of 4.74 x 10^6 kg in the spring of 1998, following
winter storms during a large El Nino episode.

Understanding how consumer pressure, resource availability
and disturbance control the dynamics of plant and algal populations is challenging, because the roles of these processes
can vary in space and time (Estes & Palmisano, 1974; Menge,
1976; Hunter & Price, 1992; Reed et al., 2011). Here, we
have used EOF analysis and nonlinear additive modelling to
identify and quantify the relative strengths of these
population drivers. For the California coastline as a whole,
wave disturbance was the dominant correlate of kelp canopy
biomass, followed by nitrate availability and the state of the
NGPO. However, the relative importance of these factors
varied spatially. Studies that focus on one or a few sites may
identify how these factors relate to one another locally, but
will miss how these relative effects vary spatially. By examining hundreds of local coastline segments across many hundreds of kilometres and over many generations, a
comprehensive understanding of how these factors contribute
to the canopy dynamics of giant kelp can be achieved.

Wave disturbance events are larger and more frequent along
the central coast than the more protected southern California
coastline, and thus represent a greater and more consistent driver of biomass along wave-exposed coastline (Reed et al.,
2011). Wave disturbance showed an increasingly negative
effect on kelp biomass at Hs > 2.5 m (Fig. 4). We saw a clear
increase in the magnitude of the surface wave disturbance coefficient north of Point Conception, where the mean maximum
winter Hs among all central coast sites was 3.3 m. Wave disturbance can also have a large effect on kelp biomass throughout
southern California, such as the large storm events associated
with El Nino episodes (Dayton & Tegner, 1984), although large ~
wave events are less frequent in southern California (7.7 seasonal maximum events above 2.5 m per coastline segment in
southern California, versus 39.7 in central California duringthe period of study) and thus explained a smaller amount of
variation in kelp dynamics in southern California.

The frond elongation rate is reduced at low nitrate concentrations, and surface water nitrate concentrations (as
estimated from SST) showed a significant positive relationship with canopy biomass at 49% of the sites across the
entire study region (Zimmerman & Kremer, 1984). It was,
however, the dominant correlate only at protected sites along
the central coast or in southern California, where wave disturbance is reduced. Mean nitrate displayed negative effects
on biomass at low concentrations and positive effects at high
concentrations, with little effect at intermediate levels (2–6
lmol L^1; Fig. 4). Although canopy persistence depends on
many factors (Rodriguez et al., 2013), in the absence of periodic removal by disturbance, kelp forests can maintain a
canopy throughout the year and may be primarily influenced
by interannual cycles of nutrient availability (Parnell et al.,
2010). Periods of high nutrient concentrations have been
associated with increased kelp growth (Gerard, 1982; Zimmerman & Kremer, 1984; Stewart et al., 2009), and the shoaling of high-density, nutrient-rich waters over the inner shelf
explains much of the interannual variation in kelp plant density in the southern end of the study area (Parnell et al.,
2010). Interannual variation in nutrient concentrations is
associated with changes in the state of the NPGO, which
operates over interannual time-scales and is characterized by
increased upwelling and horizontal advection of cool waters
from the north, extending to the southern Channel Islands
(Di Lorenzo et al., 2008). These increased incursions of cold,
nutrient-rich waters into the Southern California Bight may
be partly responsible for the episodic dynamics of kelp forests in regions that are usually defined by oligotrophic conditions, such as San Clemente and Santa Catalina islands and
the lower portion of the southern California mainland coast
(Kopczak et al., 1991; Di Lorenzo et al., 2008). Positive
values of the NPGO index display positive effects on kelp
biomass, with values above 1.4 having increased positive
effects (Fig. 4). Although El Nino variations were not pri- ~
marily correlated with any of the kelp biomass EOFs, the
wave disturbance and nutrient conditions typical of these
events may have been partly explained within the first three
EOF temporal amplitude functions, where interannual variation in the strength of each seasonal cycle is evident, especially during strong El Nino episodes. ~

Top-down effects by grazing sea urchins have been
hypothesized to have increased in the past two centuries as a
result of human-induced alteration of kelp forest food webs.
This resulted from the extirpation of sea otters by hunting
and overfishing of predatory species of fish and invertebrates,
and may have led to increased abundances of sea urchins
and other kelp grazers (Estes & Palmisano, 1974). Our
results show that higher sea urchin densities were associated
with decreases in kelp canopy biomass and sea urchin density was the dominant correlate at 25% of the sites with
long-term sea urchin records in southern California. For central-coast segments where urchin observations were available,
sea urchin density was 20 times lower than in southern California. At two of the three central coast segments where the
sea urchin density was significantly correlated with kelp biomass, a positive relationship was observed, indicating that
increased kelp may be supporting greater numbers of sea
urchins. This reinforces the notion that the top-down grazing
by sea urchins is an important local-scale driver of kelp biomass in southern California, but not in central California in
areas where sea otters are prevalent (VanBlaricom & Estes,
1988; Reed et al., 2011).

The modelling of the biogeographical structure of a species
requires an understanding of the relative importance of the
causative environmental drivers (Fenberg et al., 2014).Remotely sensed and modelled datasets can provide insight
into the mechanisms that cause populations to fluctuate at
different spatial and temporal scales. Data for some potentially important covariates, such as sea urchin density,
require time-consuming diver surveys, however, which limits
their spatial and temporal extent. Furthermore, records for
some predictor variables, such as kelp harvest, may not
extend throughout the entire time-series. The lack of comprehensive data on such drivers limits our ability to fully
understand the processes that control the dynamics and distribution of the species we study.

Here, we use observations from a time-series of giant kelp
canopy biomass and its major environmental drivers (e.g.
wave heights, nitrate concentrations and oceanographical
conditions) to model kelp biomass dynamics across a 1500-
km stretch of the California coast. Sustained departures
between these model predictions and observations may indicate the occurrence of unknown processes that have a significant impact on kelp biomass. An example can be seen at the
Carpinteria kelp forest near Santa Barbara, California, where
the time-series of sea urchin density was not included in the
model (Fig. 5). From 1998 to 2005, kelp canopy was completely absent from the Carpinteria coastline segment, but
the model predicted multiple cycles of kelp growth and
removal during this absence. Sea urchin abundance was especially high during this absence of kelp canopy, suggesting
that top-down grazing pressure overwhelmed the effects of
wave disturbance and nutrient availability during this period.
The detection of model mismatch throughout the time-series may provide a path for the elucidation of unknown or
poorly-known environmental drivers. By relating the degree
and duration of model–data mismatches to predictors measured at local-scale sites, one can infer where and when additional forces are likely to be dominant. This can lead to directed
sampling efforts or the inference of the progression of drivers
through time and space, providing additional insights into the
importance of unknown factors in controlling populations.

Understanding the spatial heterogeneity of processes that
exert control over populations remains a major focus for
landscape ecology and biogeography (Turner, 1989). Our
results demonstrate the importance of multiscale analyses of
ecosystem dynamics. A variety of known and unknown environmental and biotic forces interact to structure these systems, which vary not only through time, but also in space.
This spatial variability has the potential to lead to conflicting
conclusions concerning the relative importance of different
factors, as many studies investigating biomass and population dynamics are conducted in relatively small plots, in a
small portion of a species’ geographical range. Large-scale,
long-term, persistently sampled datasets allow for a comprehensive characterization of spatial and temporal variability
and the factors that influence this variability. Results from
such studies inform not only what has happened in the past,
but allow one to infer how future changes in drivers may
disproportionately affect certain locations or regions.