Climate models predict a dramatic increase in the annual frequency and severity of extreme weather events during the next century. Here we show that increases in the annual frequency of severe storms lead to a decrease in the diversity and complexity of food webs of giant kelp forests, one of the most productive habitats on Earth. We demonstrate this by linking natural variation in storms with measured changes in kelp forest food web structure in the Santa Barbara Channel using structural equation modeling (SEM). We then match predictions from statistical models to results from a multiyear kelp removal experiment designed to simulate frequent large storms. Both SEM models and experiments agree: if large storms remain at their current annual frequency (roughly one major kelp-removing storm every 3.5 years), periodic storms help maintain the complexity of kelp forest food webs. However, if large storms increase in annual frequency and begin to occur year after year, kelp forest food webs become less diverse and complex as species go locally extinct. The loss of complexity occurs primarily due to decreases in the diversity and complexity of higher trophic levels. Our findings demonstrate that shifts in climate-driven disturbances that affect foundation species are likely to have impacts that cascade through entire ecosystems.

Periodic disturbances are a natural component of almost every ecosystem, and many ecological models predict that the mortalities imposed by occasional disturbances can be vital for maintaining biological diversity as well as renewing essential nutrients. However, many of these same models also predict a decrease in
diversity when the frequency or severity of disturbances becomes too great (Connell, 1978). Such predictions are important given that most climate change models show that the future will be characterized by
increases in the frequency, and possibly severity, of many forms of large abiotic disturbances across the
globe (Easterling et al., 2000; Meehl et al., 2000, 2007). 

The consequences of increases in disturbance frequency for the diversity and complexity of an entire
ecosystem are far from clear, however. Several decades of research characterizing how disturbance can influence species diversity have yielded no strong consensus (Mackey & Currie, 2001; Hughes et al., 2007). In large part, this is because the theoretical foundations of most disturbance-diversity models do not incorporate multiple trophic levels (but see Wootton, 1998). These models also do not capture changes in the patterns of feeding links between species within an ecosystem – the structure of its food web. More general theories and observational analyses of food webs have concluded that the stress and stochasticity indicative of disturbance should simplify and shorten food webs (Briand, 1983; Menge & Sutherland, 1987). The evidence for direct impacts of disturbance on food chain length is equivocal, however (e.g., Pimm & Kitching, 1987; Marks et al., 2000; Walters & Post, 2008; McHugh et al., 2010). In contrast, food web complexity has routinely been linked to the input of energy into an ecosystem (Oksanen et al., 1981; Schoener, 1989; Thompson & Townsend, 1999), habitat structure (Briand & Cohen, 1987; Thompson & Townsend 2005), habitat heterogeneity (Walters & Post, 2008), and ecosystem size (Schoener, 1989; Post et al., 2000) all of which can be altered by disturbance. Thus, the indirect impacts on food webs of disturbances driven by climate change are likely to be more prominent than the direct impacts.

Disturbance-driven changes in food web structure affect ecosystem stability and function. For example,
decreases in species richness at any one trophic level can alter primary production, nutrient cycling, and predator–prey dynamics (Cardinale et al., 2006). Simultaneous changes in diversity at multiple trophic levels can have complex and often unpredictable consequences for both primary and secondary production (Gamfeldt et al., 2005; Douglass et al., 2008). Furthermore, alteration of the network structure of food webs could impact the resilience of ecosystems to future human impacts. Reductions in the complexity of food webs have been suggested to decrease both their long-term stability and increase the probability of cascading extinctions if food webs are further perturbed (McCann et al., 1998; Dunne et al., 2002; Roopnarine et al., 2007; Ling et al., 2009). 

Disturbances caused by climate change might therefore affect the function and stability of a broad variety of
ecosystems by altering their food web structure. In the Eastern Pacific, climate records show that the
annual frequency of years with large waves driven by winter storms has increased over the last 60 years (Graham & Diaz, 2001; Bromirski et al., 2003; Ruggiero et al., 2010). This increase in the annual frequency of large storm-driven waves could have detrimental effects on coastal ecosystems dominated by the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera, which is a foundational species that provides habitat and energy to fuel a highly complex and productive food web (Dayton, 1985; Graham, 2004; Reed & Brzezinski, 2009). Large waves associated with winter storms often tear out giant kelp, reducing the abundance of this habitat forming species. These reductions likely result in changes to the structure of the associated kelp forest food web (e.g., through changes in three-dimensional habitat structure as in Briand & Cohen, 1987), yet changes beyond associated sessile species (Arkema et al., 2009) have yet to be documented. Giant kelp in southern California, for example, typically recovers from severe storms within 2 years, faster than the current frequency of one severe storm every 3.5 years (Graham et al., 1997). If large storms begin to occur annually, though, food web structure may be greatly altered. 

Here we show that an increase in the annual frequency of severe kelp-removing storms simplifies food webs in the kelp forests of southern California. To understand how changes in wave disturbances from winter storms influence kelp forest food webs, we examined the direct and indirect mechanisms by which large storms influence kelp forest food web structure using structural equation modeling (SEM; Bollen, 1989). To fit models, we used data from 35 sites distributed across nine rocky reefs in the Santa Barbara Channel from 2002 through 2009. Food webs from these reefs comprised 217 species with  1800 possible feeding links documented in the literature. We then used parameterized models to simulate the effects of different disturbance frequencies on food web structure, and verified these predictions with a multiyear field experiment that mimicked kelp loss from large storms.

In order to assemble a food web for all species sampled in the SBC LTER summer kelp forest community surveys, we conducted a literature review on diets and consumptive habits of target species. After obtaining information from several general reviews of the natural history of kelp forest fish and invertebrates (Limbaugh, 1955; Quast, 1968; Foster & Schiel, 1985; Hobson & Chess, 1986, 2001) we performed a search for each species using ISI Web of Science, Google Scholar, Avano, and Aquatic Commons. Each species name was searched with the additional keywords of ‘diet*’, ‘predator’, ‘prey’, ‘gut content*’, and ‘feeding’ (asterisks used to expand search terms). In addition, we searched these five keywords in thesis, grey literature, and student report databases at the Cadet Hand Library at the Bodega Marine Laboratory, the Moss Landing Marine Laboratory Library, the Miller Library at the Hopkins Marine Station, and the Scripps Institute of Oceanography Library. Only feeding observations from studies that showed direct consumption (e.g., either a feeding observation in the field, gut contents, or lab preference study) or provided strong evidence of a direct feeding relationship between two taxa were used. Our final food web was revised and verified after consultation with several experts in the field of kelp forest community ecology

We quantified disturbance from storms as the maximum horizontal orbital velocity of waves in the winter. This measurement integrates both swell height and period and corresponds to the greatest stress on kelp fronds exerted by waves during severe winter storms (Graham et al., 1997). It should therefore correlate with the largest amount of potential damage done to giant kelp by winter storms in a given year. Maximum winter horizontal orbital velocity measurements at each transect were calculated by taking swell height and period measurements from the Coastal Data Information Project’s swell model (http://cdip.ucsd.edu) and transforming them using equations from linear wave theory (see Denny et al., 2004 for equations). Measurements were taken from the closest modeled location to a given transect (typically o100 m away). We took the maximum value for the period from December through March, the time of maximum storm intensity in the Santa Barbara Channel.

We note that giant kelp forests in central California currently experience harsher, more frequent disturbance regimes (Graham et al., 1997). While the food webs of these kelp forests have been poorly studied, results of quantitative surveys show that the understory is dominated by perennial macroalgae and sessile invertebrates, which are relatively resistant to wave disturbance (Foster & VanBlaricom, 2001). Experimental removals of the perennial understory done to simulate different intensities of disturbance resulted in increased species richness (Reed & Foster, 1984) suggesting that increases in the intensity of winter storms in central California could alter food webs in much the same way as increases in the frequency of winter storms in southern California. Additional studies of the determinants of food web structure in kelp forests subjected to different disturbance regimes coupled with regional comparisons should provide more robust conclusions regarding the role of wave disturbance in structuring giant kelp forest food webs.

If global change disproportionately affects foundation species, then it may similarly cause shifts in resource availability and physical habitat structure that shape the structure of food webs. In giant kelp forests, increases in the frequency of wave disturbance indirectly alters the environment by removing giant kelp, thereby affecting light, hydrodynamics and the three-dimensional structure of the habitat (reviewed in Graham et al., 2007). Elevated resources resulting from the loss of giant kelp have been shown to enhance the diversity and production of understory algae (Reed & Foster, 1984; Arkema et al., 2009; Miller et al., 2011) and undoubtedly led to the increases in algal richness revealed in our analyses. Such increases initially stimulated primary consumer diversity (Fig. 2), likely due to a bottom-up diversity cascade (Dyer & Letourneau, 2003). The increase in algal richness and concomitant increase in primary consumer richness that we observed drove changes in food web complexity after a single disturbance even as mobile species richness declined (Fig. 3, Table 2). Intriguingly, the decline in mobile species richness, likely indicating a loss of diversity at higher trophic levels given the net increase in mobile consumers (Fig. 2), led to an initial gain in food chain length typically associated with a gain in predator diversity (Pimm & Kitching, 1987; Marks et al., 2000; McHugh et al., 2010), suggesting a greater need to understand food chain length in systems with intraguild predation. When considered collectively our results support the argument that the effects of climate change on species richness are mediated by different processes at different trophic levels (Wootton, 1998).

While our results focus on the structure of kelp forest food webs, based on our current understanding of the link between food web structure and function, we hypothesize that these changes may translate to altered ecological function. There is a growing recognition that the structure of food webs can influence their productivity (Cardinale et al., 2006; Duffy et al., 2007), longterm stability (McCann et al., 1998), and resilience to further extinctions (Dunne et al., 2002; Roopnarine et al., 2007). This change in function may even feed back to further alter kelp forest food web structure. For example, decreases in the diversity of predators within kelp forests can reduce consumptive and nonconsumptive pressure on herbivores, leading to further decreases in the abundance of giant kelp (Byrnes et al., 2006). This, too, may have contributed to the discrepancy between the results of our simulations and experimental manipulations. Our work demonstrates that if the annual frequency of severe weather events continues to increase due to climate change (Easterling et al., 2000; Meehl et al., 2000), impacts on structure forming foundation species (e.g., coral, seagrasses, trees) may fundamentally alter food web structure. Recovery of foundation species can then be stymied by climate change’s effect on their physiology (Wernberg et al., 2010), expansions in the range of novel predators (Ling, 2008), and can be further reduced by various human caused disturbances (Ling et al., 2009). As such there is a compelling need to understand how increases in the frequency of climatedriven disturbances cascade through foundation species to food webs and, ultimately, to changes in the function of whole ecosystems.