Synthesizing long-term observations at
multiple scales is vital for understanding the environmental drivers of ecosystem dynamics. We assessed
the role of several environmental drivers in explaining
temporal and spatial patterns in the abundance of
giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera in the Santa Barbara
Channel between 1984 and 2009. We developed a
novel method for estimating the canopy biomass of
giant kelp from Landsat 5 Thematic Mapper satellite
imagery, which allowed us to examine the dynamics of
giant-kelp biomass on spatial scales ranging from 100s
of m2 to 100s of km2 and temporal scales ranging from
several weeks to 25 yr. Comparisons of changes in
canopy biomass with oceanographic and climatic data
revealed that winter losses of regional kelp canopy
biomass were positively correlated with significant
wave height (r2 = 0.50), while spring recoveries were
negatively correlated with sea surface temperature
(r2 = 0.30; used as a proxy for nutrient availability). On
interannual timescales, regional kelp-canopy biomass
lagged the variations in wave heights, sea surface temperatures, and the North Pacific Gyre Oscillation index
by 3 yr, indicating that these factors affect cycles of
kelp recruitment and mortality. Results from cluster
analysis showed that the response of kelp biomass to
environmental conditions varied among different subregions of the Santa Barbara Channel. The dynamics
of kelp biomass in exposed regions were related to
wave disturbance, while kelp dynamics in sheltered
regions tracked sea surface temperatures more closely.
These results depict a high level of regional heterogeneity in the biomass dynamics of this important
foundation species.

Climate-related changes in the oceans appear to be
accelerating: oceans are becoming warmer and more
acidic, nutrient distributions are changing, and, in
some regions such as the Northeast Pacific, the frequency and intensity of large storms are increasing
(e.g. Easterling et al. 2000, Behrenfeld et al. 2006,
Doney et al. 2009). Many marine ecosystems have
displayed dramatic responses to recent fluctuations in
climate, and accumulating evidence suggests that
coastal marine ecosystems are especially vulnerable to
the effects of climate change (e.g. Harley et al. 2006,
Przeslawski et al. 2008, Hoegh-Guldberg & Bruno
2010). However, our understanding of how climate-
induced changes in environmental conditions will affect
coastal marine ecosystems is limited. Data collection is
labor-intensive and there are relatively few long-term
(>20 yr) studies of change in coastal marine ecosystems as compared to terrestrial systems (Rosenzweig et
al. 2008). Increasing the number of long-term, largescale data sets of coastal ecosystems is needed to
further our understanding of how they are likely to
respond to future changes in climate.

Among coastal primary producers, forests of giant
kelp Macrocystis pyrifera are particularly sensitive to
climate change (Graham et al. 2007). Giant kelp is the
world’s largest alga and its numerous fronds extend
vertically in the water column and form a canopy at the
sea surface. The biomass of giant kelp is exceptionally
dynamic; short lifespans of both fronds and entire
plants (4 to 6 mo and 2 to 3 yr, respectively) combine
with rapid growth (~2% of total biomass d–1) to produce a standing biomass that turns over 6 to 7 times
yr–1 (Reed et al. 2008). Because of such rapid turnover,
the biomass dynamics of giant kelp responds quickly
to changes in environmental conditions.
Giant-kelp recruitment and growth are controlled by
abotic factors, including the availability of hard substrate, solar radiation, and the supply of nutrients, as
well as the biotic effects of inter- and intra-species
competition for space, light and grazing (reviewed in
Graham et al. 2007). In southern California, growth is
fastest in winter and spring when nutrient levels are
high and competition for light and space is low (due to
low algal biomass), and slowest during summer when
nutrients are low and competition for light and space is
high due to well-developed algal canopies (Zimmerman & Kremer 1986, Reed et al. 2008). The relatively
low capacity of giant kelp to store nutrients (~30 d,
Zimmerman & Kremer 1986) causes populations to
respond rapidly to fluctuations in nutrient supply.
Much like growth, the recruitment of giant kelp in
southern California and elsewhere responds strongly
to fluctuations in nutrients and light as determined by
biotic and abiotic processes (Dayton et al. 1984, Reed &
Foster 1984, Reed et al. 2008). Giant kelp produces
spores throughout the year (Reed et al. 1996) and the
recruitment of new plants typically occurs whenever
favorable conditions of light and nutrients coincide
(Deysher & Dean 1986).

Giant-kelp mortality occurs in the form of senescence, grazing, and wave-driven disturbance (Graham
et al. 2007). Reed et al. (2008) found that both frond
losses and plant mortality were correlated to wave
heights in kelp forests near Santa Barbara, California,
although correlations were stronger at the plant level.
High mortality can also result from prolonged con -
ditions of low nutrients such as those associated with
El Niño events (Dayton & Tegner 1990, Dayton et al.
1999, Edwards 2004). The biomass dynamics of giant
kelp reflect the interplay of these physical and bio -
logical forcings that control patterns of recruitment,
growth, and mortality.
The relative importance of resource availability (light
and nutrients) versus physical disturbance (waves)
in controlling the biomass dynamics of giant kelp
remains an open question. For example, Dayton et al.
(1999) found that large-scale, low-frequency changes
in nutrient availability had the largest effects on kelp
populations in San Diego; however, recent analyses of
kelp forests in central and southern California during
2001 to 2009 (a period lacking any major nutrient-poor
El Niño conditions) showed that wave disturbance ex -
plained more variability in kelp biomass and production than either nutrient availability or grazing (Reed
et al. 2008, D. C. Reed et al. unpubl.). It is clear that the
apparent influence that each of these physical forcings
has on kelp populations is dependent on the spatial
and temporal scales of observation (Edwards 2004).
While a particular kelp forest may be nutrient-limited
at a given time, another forest in a more nutrient-rich
region may have its dynamics controlled by wave disturbance. The vast majority of long-term kelp studies
have been made at the local scale (<500 m2) and so it
has been difficult to test how their conclusions apply to
larger areas (>1 km2).

In the past, aerial and satellite
imagery have been used to examine giant kelp forests
at regional scales; however, these studies have generally been either short-term pilot studies (e.g. Deysher
1993, Stekoll et al. 2006) or limited to just a few years
(e.g. Donnellan 2004, Cavanaugh et al. 2010), too short
a period to examine interannual-to-decadal variability
in kelp biomass dynamics. Longer time series (e.g. Parnell et al. 2010) are needed to detect long-term trends
in kelp biomass as well as to determine how the roles
of various environmental controls change over time.
In the present study, we introduce a new kelp
canopy biomass data set possessing unprecedented
spatial and temporal resolution and extent that was
created using multispectral imagery from the Landsat
5 Thematic Mapper (TM) sensor. These observations
enabled the assessment of giant-kelp canopy biomass
at 30 m resolution across the entire Santa Barbara
Channel every 1 to 2 mo for 25 yr (1984 to 2009). We
compared these novel observations of giant-kelp
forests with oceanographic and climate observations to
assess resource- and disturbance-driven controls on
giant-kelp biomass at multiple spatial and temporal
scales. Our objectives were to determine (1) the relative importance of nutrients and wave disturbance
in driving both seasonal and interannual cycles of
regional kelp biomass in the Santa Barbara Channel
and (2) how the roles of these forcing processes vary
spatially within the channel. We hypothesized that the
negative effects of wave disturbance and nutrient
limitation on giant-kelp biomass vary greatly in space
and time due to the highly dynamic environmental
conditions of the Santa Barbara Channel. We showed
that kelp biomass was significantly negatively related
to wave heights and sea surface temperatures (SST;
a proxy for nutrient levels) at seasonal timescales.
Interannual relationships were more complex as kelp
biomass lagged wave heights, SST, and the North
Pacific Gyre Oscillation (NPGO) climate index by 3 yr.
We also demonstrated that these dependencies varied
between distinct subregions within the Santa Barbara
Channel.

Both SST and wave height displayed the pronounced
seasonal cycles characteristic of this region (Fig. 4B,C).
SST typically reached its annual minimum between
February and March and its maximum between
August and October, and we can infer that nitrate
showed the opposite pattern. Significant wave height
maxima occurred in the winter months, corresponding
with the timing of increased storm activity in the North
Pacific. Between 1987 and 2009, the annual maximum
winter (December to February) wave height averaged
4.9 m while the annual maximum summer (June to
August) wave height averaged 3.26 m. During our study
period, annual mean significant wave heights increased
significantly at the pace of 0.02 m yr–1 (F1, 22 = 25.9, p <
0.001). This positive trend in wave height agrees with
other observations of increasing wave heights in the
Northeast Pacific over the last 60 yr (Bromirski et al.
2003, Ruggiero et al. 2010).

Our Landsat 5 TM data set represents the first highresolution, local- to regional-scale assessment of giantkelp canopy biomass on monthly-to-decadal time scales.
This data set is itself a significant accomplishment as it
provides a novel view into kelp-forest dynamics across
a wide range of scales. Previous studies have demonstrated the feasibility of measuring kelp canopy cover
and biomass with aerial and satellite imagery (Jensen
et al. 1980, Deysher 1993, Stekoll et al. 2006, Cavan -
augh et al. 2010); however, these studies have not had
the extended temporal coverage that is presented
here. Parnell et al. (2010) examined annual-to-decadal
variability in giant-kelp cover near San Diego using
aerial surveys, but they used maximum annual canopy
area and so did not measure seasonal variability. While
Landsat provides unmatched temporal resolution and
coverage, it has a coarser spatial resolution than the
sensors used in some of these previous studies (30 m
with Landsat, as compared to ~1 m in Stekoll et al.
2006 and 10 m in Cavanaugh et al. 2010). In addition,
Landsat has a relatively low radiometric resolution,
which limits its ability to differentiate small changes in
reflectance between pixels. One consequence of the
reduced spatial and radiometric resolution of Landsat
is higher levels of uncertainty when comparing satellite data to transect-scale diver-measured biomass (the
r2 between Landsat and diver-measured canopy biomass was 0.64, compared to 0.77 for Cavanaugh et al.
2010 and 0.84 for Stekoll et al. 2006). Nevertheless, the
Landsat-measured and diver-measured canopy biomass relationship was still strong and highly significant and provides a path for assessing regional satellite canopy biomass variations. As the availability of
imagery with higher spatial and radiometric resolutions increases, more accurate remotely sensed time
series of kelp biomass can be developed using techniques similar to the one we have presented here.
However, not all species of kelp are amenable to
remote sensing by this method, which relies on nearinfrared reflectance that is rapidly attenuated by water.
Consequently, the usefulness of satellite imagery in
studying the dynamics of marine vegetation is at present limited to species that produce a dense, floating
canopy of an appropriate spatial scale.

There is an upper limit on the amount of kelp that the
region can support that is based simply on the availability of suitable habitat. However, it seems difficult to
identify a regional equilibrium for giant-kelp canopy
due to its highly dynamic nature. If the global extent of
kelp is changing, then it will likely be difficult to detect
in regions such as the Santa Barbara Channel that
are at the center of the giant kelp’s hemispherical
range. While we did not observe a long-term directional trend in kelp canopy biomass, we did find that
regional-scale kelp biomass oscillated on cycles with
periods of 1 and 12–13 yr. The annual cycles were driven by losses related to winter storm activity and, to a
lesser extent, recovery linked to nutrient levels (Fig. 5).
While physical storm-driven mortality was direct and
immediate, the effect of nutrients on kelp growth were
likely delayed and complicated by a number of other
factors, including the availability of light and unoccupied hard substrate, and spore settlement and recruitment; hence, a weaker relationship was observed.
While these winter losses and spring recoveries characterized the annual cycle in general, there was substantial variability in the amplitude and timing of these
cycles among years.

Interannual relationships between kelp canopy biomass and physical drivers were less clear. Recovery of
kelp populations can be extremely rapid. Thus annual
means and maximums can be decoupled from the
previous winter’s wave disturbance. This may help
explain why past studies using annual observations
made in the summer or fall failed to find a relationship
between waves and kelp population metrics (Tegner
et al. 1996). The longer period cycles in kelp biomass
corresponded to the NPGO, waves, and nutrient levels
(as inferred from SST), but lagged these variables by
3 yr (Fig. 6). This 3 yr lag is somewhat counterintuitive
in light of the rapid turnover of the fronds that create
kelp canopies. We suspect that the lagged relationships are related to the recruitment and mortality of
entire plants. While losses of fronds on extant plants
occur continuously throughout the year, mortality of
entire plants occurs more episodically and is related to
large wave events (>1 m in Reed et al. 2008). Exceptionally large wave events can clear space and allow
for dramatic spikes in recruitment (Graham et al.
1997). Previous work has shown that environmental
conditions at the time of recruitment and juvenile
growth of kelp cohorts can have long-lasting effects onpopulation dynamics and community structure (Tegner et al. 1997, Dayton et al. 1999). For example, Tegner et al. (1997) compared succession after 2 large disturbances under contrasting oceanographic regimes
and found that nutrient-rich conditions led to high densities and competitive dominance of giant kelp that
lasted for the life of the cohort (~5 yr). This result
agrees with the lagged negative relationship we found
between SST (and by extension, nutrients) and kelp
canopy biomass. Together, large waves and high nutrient levels in a given year promote the recruitment and
growth of a new cohort of giant-kelp plants (Fig. 10).
This cohort matures over the next 2 to 3 yr, developing
high levels of canopy biomass in the absence of severe
storms. We found that severe storms with long-period
wave events >5.5 m occurred at an average frequency
of 1 every 2 to 4 yr, thus allowing populations to ex -
pand their areal extents until the cycle is repeated or
all available habitat is utilized.

Many studies have linked massive declines in kelp
populations to severe El Niño conditions and have
observed rapid recovery of kelp populations during
nutrient-rich La Niña events (Dayton & Tegner 1990,
Dayton et al. 1992, 1999, Edwards 2004). In addition,
Parnell et al. (2010) found that the response of kelp
populations to El Niño events is modulated by lowfrequency changes in the PDO: the importance of
nutrient control in the San Diego area increased after
the PDO switched to a warm phase in the late 1970s.
However, the relationship between kelp and the
NPGO has largely been neglected. We observed that
strong El Niño events in 1987, 1997, and 2003 coincided with large regional mortality events (Fig. 4);
however, the long (12 to 13 yr) period cycles in regional
kelp biomass were better correlated with the NPGO,
again at a 3 yr lag. The NPGO is driven by regional
variations in wind-driven upwelling and horizontal
advection and corresponds closely with correlates of
ecosystem productivity such as nutrient levels and
chlorophyll concentrations (Di Lorenzo et al. 2008).
Therefore, the NPGO appears to influence decadal
variations in kelp canopy biomass though large-scale,
low-frequency changes in nutrient availability that in
turn affect recruitment and growth of giant kelp.

While no long-term trends were evident in the kelp
time series, we did see a statistically significant longterm increase in mean and maximum significant wave
heights over our study period. Other studies have
observed similar trends in the Eastern Pacific (Bro -
mirski et al. 2003, Ruggiero et al. 2010), and many climate models predict that the frequency and possibly
the intensity of large storms will continue to increase in
this region (Easterling et al. 2000, Meehl et al. 2000,
2007). This has the potential to increase the effects of
wave events on the coastlines of southern California,
leading to higher annual winter losses. Reed et al.
(2008) found that biomass at the start of the growth
year (after winter storm disturbances) explained 63%
of the annual net primary productivity of giant kelp at
3 sites along the mainland shore of the Santa Barbara
Channel. Therefore, in creased winter-time wave
losses would likely lead to decreased annual produc -
tivity by giant kelp in this region. These types of
threats to the productivity of habitat structuring kelps
are not rest ricted to our study area; Wernberg et al. (2010) demonstrated how
increases in wave disturbance and ocean
temperatures can act synergistically to
reduce the resilience of populations of the
subsurface canopy-forming kelp Ecklonia
radiata in Australia. In addition, the implications of in creased levels of physical disturbance span trophic levels as repeated
kelp loss due to waves has been linked to
lower diversity and complexity of kelpforest food webs (Byrnes et al. 2011).

Our results indicate that Point Conception marks a
major biogeographic boundary for the seasonal dy -
namics of giant-kelp forests in California. Changes in
kelp biomass along the exposed coastline north of
Point Conception were well-correlated with wave
height, but not SST as high storm mortalities were
observed each winter. This created a pronounced and
predictable seasonal cycle with lower interannual variability than the more sheltered subregions to the south
(Fig. 9). The high variation in canopy biomass ob -
served in October and November (e.g. long boxes in
Fig. 9A) reflect variability in the timing of the onset of
the winter storm season. Relatively high nutrient conditions in this subregion likely allowed for consistent
spring and summer recovery each year (Jackson 1987).
This result agrees with those of Donnellan (2004), who
found that seasonal canopy dynamics of exposed central Californian kelp beds were highly regular and predictable. The subregions containing the Santa Barbara
Channel Islands represented a combination of more
complex exposure and nutrient conditions. Seasonality
of kelp biomass in Subregion B was similar to that of
the exposed Subregion A, but Subregion B displayed a
higher variability in the timing of annual minimums
that was likely due to the higher variability of exposures contained in this subregion. Subregion B showed
consistent spring recovery each year, probably reflecting the fact that biomass dynamics of this subregion
are rarely limited by nutrients. Like the coastline north
of Point Conception, the south sides of the 2 westernmost Channel Islands are typically bathed in nutrientrich water (Otero & Siegel 2004, McPhee-Shaw et al.
2007).

Previous studies have shown fluctuations in kelp
abundance on cycles of 3 to 5 yr and have suggested
that these fluctuations result from seasonal forcings
such as wave disturbance (Dayton et al. 1984, Graham
et al. 1997). Nisbet & Bence (1989) developed a family
of 2-stage kelp population models (juvenile and adults)
that reproduced 3 to 5 yr cycles as well as shorterperiod 1 yr cycles. Their models were based on the
idea that population dynamics are driven by recruitment events, which are in turn controlled by tem -
perature, bottom irradiance, and unknown stochastic
factors. Their models predicted that larger seasonal
fluctuations in surface irradiance and adult mortality,
such as those driven by wave disturbance, should lead
to more regular annual recruitment as mortality of
adults each year frees up space and resources (i.e.
light) for new recruits. On a regional scale, we found
that exposed coastlines experienced more regular
annual cycles of winter mortality and spring recovery
than did sheltered regions. Our observation of greater
regularity of the annual cycles in exposed regions is in
contrast to that observed by Graham et al. (1997) in
central California and may reflect differences in the
spatial scales over which kelp was measured in the 2
studies (i.e. m2 in Graham et al. 2007 vs. km2 in the
present study). The dynamics of giant kelp at fieldtransect scales do not always reflect dynamics at the
forest or regional scales (Cavanaugh et al. 2010).
The present work represents the most spatially and
temporally comprehensive analysis of the drivers of
giant-kelp biomass to date. We have shown that there
is a large amount of regional heterogeneity in the
response of kelp biomass to different environmental
factors, demonstrating that conclusions drawn from
local studies cannot always be applied to regional
scales. The roles of environmental drivers of kelp biomass also vary in time, making it difficult to predict the
response of this system to future changes in environmental conditions. Continued large-scale and longterm observations are needed to better our understanding of how ecosystems may behave differently in
a future climate.