Populations of many species display spatially synchronous fluctuations in
abundance. Synchrony is most commonly attributed to three processes: factors that influence
recruitment (e.g., dispersal, early survival), large-scale environmental variability, and spatially
autocorrelated trophic interactions. However it is often difficult to link population synchrony
to a specific dominant process, particularly when multiple synchronizing forces are operating.
We utilized a new satellite-based data set of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) canopy biomass
to examine population synchrony in southern California kelp forests on spatial scales ranging
from 50 m to 300 km and temporal scales ranging from 1 to 11 years. We examined the
relationship between synchrony and distance for adult kelp populations, kelp recruits, sea
urchin abundance (a major grazer of kelp), and environmental variables known to influence
kelp population dynamics. Population synchrony in giant kelp decreased with distance
between populations: an initial rapid exponential decrease between 50 m and 1.3 km was
followed by a second, large-scale decrease between distances of 1.3 km and 172 km. The 50-m
to 1.3-km spatial scale corresponded to the scales of synchrony in the abundance of sea
urchins and young kelp recruits, suggesting that local drivers of predation and recruitment
influence small-scale synchrony in kelp populations. The spatial correlation patterns of
environmental variables, particularly wave height, were similar to the synchrony–distance
relationship of kelp populations from 1.3 km to 172 km, suggesting that regional
environmental variability, i.e., the Moran effect, was the dominant process affecting
synchrony at larger spatial scales. This two-step pattern in the relationship between kelp
biomass synchrony and distance was apparent in each of the 11 years of our study. Our results
highlight the potential for synthesizing approaches from both landscape and population
ecology in order to identify the multiple processes that generate synchrony in population
dynamics.

Understanding how and why populations vary in
space and time is a central challenge in ecology. A great
deal of theoretical work has addressed how various
processes interact to create spatial and temporal
patterns in population abundance (Kareiva and Wennergren 1995, Bascompte and Sole´ 1998). Testing this
theory with empirical data has been challenging because
there are few species for which long-term abundance
data across large spatial scales are available.

One commonly observed spatiotemporal pattern in
ecology is synchrony, the tendency of populations to
fluctuate together through time (Buonaccorsi et al.
2001). Synchrony is most commonly calculated as the
correlation between two populations through time
(Bjørnstad et al. 1999a). Such trends have been observed
in a variety of animal (Hanski and Woiwod 1993, de
Valpine et al. 2010) and plant (Koenig and Knopes
2000) populations. Covariance in population dynamics
is generally attributed to three types of mechanisms:
regional stochasticity (often in the form of environmental variability), recruitment processes (such as dispersal), and trophic interactions. In his classic study of the
Canadian lynx, P. A. P. Moran hypothesized that
spatially separated populations are synchronized by
regional, density independent variability in temperature,
a mechanism later termed the Moran effect (Moran
1953). If local dynamics among populations are similar
and not highly nonlinear, the Moran effect predicts that
population synchrony will mirror environmental synchrony (e.g., Bjørnstad 2000). Dispersal can also synchronize populations through the movement of
individuals or reproductive stages (Ranta et al. 1995).
Finally, trophic interactions such as predation and
parasitoidism have been invoked as a mechanism to
synchronize populations at spatial scales corresponding
to the scale of synchrony of the predator population
(Ims and Andreassen 2000).

Theoretical studies have shown that associating
synchrony with a particular forcing process can be
difficult. For example, dispersal can generate synchrony
over distances longer than the scale of dispersal (Lande
et al. 1999, Gouhier et al. 2010) and interactions between
dispersal and environmental effects can reduce each
factor’s synchronizing effect (Kendall et al. 2000).
However, the degree to which synchronizing processes
can be differentiated will depend on the particular
system in question. If one factor is substantially more
influential than others or if the factors operate on very
different spatial scales, then population dynamics may
display ‘‘characteristic spatial scales of regulation’’
(Bjørnstad et al. 1999b), making it easier to link pattern
with process (de Roos et al. 1991). Also, in many species,
autocorrelation in population dynamics declines with
increasing distance. The rate of this decline and the
distance at which spatial autocorrelation falls to zero
can serve as tools for identifying synchronizing mechanisms.

However, analyzing patterns of population synchrony
in isolation is typically not sufficient to draw conclusions
about the processes producing these patterns (Abbott
2007). One must also evaluate the spatial autocorrelation of environmental controls, dispersal, and trophic
interactions. If populations are autocorrelated over long
distances relative to dispersal and exhibit a decline in
synchrony with distance comparable to that of largescale environmental controls, then environmental fluctuations are potentially the cause of the large-scale
correlation (Peltonen et al. 2002). On the other hand,
rapid decreases in synchrony over relatively short
distances may be driven by dispersal or local trophic
interactions (de Roos et al. 1991). For sessile organisms,
rapid decreases in synchrony can also reflect small-scale
variability in environmental processes that control
recruitment success (e.g., topography, soil type, elevation, light). In most cases the relationship between
synchrony and distance in populations will likely be
controlled by a combination of processes, and very few
empirical studies have simultaneously examined the
roles of multiple processes in causing spatial autocorrelation in population dynamics. Still, caution is warranted when inferring causality by matching patterns of
synchrony among populations with the patterns of their
potential regulating factors. For example, Lande et al.
(1999) demonstrated that small-scale dispersal could
induce synchrony at large scales in the presence of
environmental correlation when the dispersal rate is
much larger than the strength of density regulation.
During the past decade the significance of synchrony–
distance relationships has been examined in several
species using novel statistical techniques (Bjørnstad et al.
1999b, Bjørnstad and Falck 2001, de Valpine et al.
2010). Still, the spatial resolution and/or extent of these
studies have been limited. Either the spatial resolution of
observations was equal to or coarser than the dispersal
distance of the species under investigation (Bjørnstad et
al. 1999b, Peltonen et al. 2002) or the extent was too
small to observe spatial variability in environmental
factors (de Valpine et al. 2010). As a result, most past
studies of synchrony have not been able to fully evaluate
how the roles of different synchronizing processes vary
across spatial scales (but see Gouhier et al. 2010).

We utilized a new long-term, large-scale, highresolution remotely sensed data set of giant kelp
(Macrocystis pyrifera) canopy biomass in the coastal
waters of southern California (Cavanaugh et al. 2011) as
a case study to examine patterns of spatial synchrony
across scales ranging from tens of meters to hundreds of
kilometers. Compared to other habitat-structuring
primary producers, giant kelp forests are exceptionally
dynamic. Short life spans of both kelp fronds (4–6
months) and entire kelp plants (2–3 years) combine with
rapid growth (;2% of total biomass per day) to produce
a standing biomass that turns over 6–7 times per year
(e.g., Reed et al. 2008, 2011). Growth and mortality of
giant kelp is strongly influenced by environmental
factors such as light, wave height, and nutrient levels
(reviewed in Graham et al. 2007). Therefore, we
expected to observe at least some synchrony in kelp
dynamics due to seasonal cycles in these controls.
Hence, our analyses focused on how patterns of
synchrony in giant kelp populations declined with
distance, and how these patterns varied over time. In
order to identify the most important synchronizing
processes, we compared the synchrony–distance curve of
giant kelp to patterns of autocorrelation in environmental variables, predator abundance, and giant kelp
recruitment. We examined synchrony in changes of kelp
biomass rather than raw biomass in order to emphasize
autocorrelation patterns in the growth and mortality of
giant kelp populations. Using changes in biomass also
has the benefit of removing long-term trends that can
induce spurious correlation (Bjørnstad et al. 1999a,
Koenig 1999).

Sea surface temperature (used as a proxy for nutrient
levels in this region) and storm-driven wave disturbance,
two important environmental controls of kelp biomass,
are correlated on scales much larger than the scale of
kelp dispersal (Reed et al. 2006a, Cavanaugh et al. 2011;
see also Results: Spatial synchrony in giant kelp,
environmental, and urchin data). Therefore any decreases
in synchrony observed over large distances would likely
reflect a large-scale Moran effect, while decreases over
very short distances could be due to dispersal or other
local processes that influence giant kelp recruitment
(e.g., bottom irradiance, local currents, competition). Grazers could induce synchrony in kelp populations on
scales corresponding to the scales of synchrony in grazer
abundances. Unlike regional-scale environmental factors such as waves and nutrients, we did not have much
a priori knowledge of the spatial scales of synchrony in
patterns of kelp recruitment or grazer abundance.

The strength and timing of the seasonal cycle in kelp
abundance varies a great deal among years (Cavanaugh
et al. 2011), and so we might expect that the patterns of
synchrony in kelp populations also vary substantially
among years. To explore this inter-annual variability we
examined the relationship between kelp biomass synchrony and distance separately for each year from 2000
to 2011. We show that by combining large-scale, highspatial-resolution data of giant kelp with data characterizing environmental variables and grazer abundance,
it may be possible to identify the effects of multiple
synchronizing processes on the relationship between
kelp synchrony and distance. The availability of longterm time series data from satellite sensors such as
Landsat TM has increased dramatically in recent years,
and so these methods can be used to characterize
synchrony across multiple space and time scales in a
variety of habitats where changes in abundance can be
tracked from satellite imagery.

Limited nutrient levels, specifically nitrogen, have
been shown to limit kelp growth in southern California
(Jackson 1977, Gerard 1982). Although kelp growth
appears not to be influenced by water temperature per se
(North and Zimmerman 1984), local sea surface
temperature (SST) and nutrients (specifically nitrate þ
nitrite) show a strong negative linear relationship in
southern California (Fram et al. 2008, Lucas et al. 2011).
Therefore, we used satellite observations of local SST as
a proxy for nitrate/nitrite levels. Monthly mean SST was
assessed using merged MODIS Terra and MODIS Aqua
daytime 1-km-resolution satellite observations (Kahru
et al. 2009). This SST data set covered the entire region
for which we had kelp data (Fig. 1a). To place the SST
data on the same grid as the kelp canopy biomass data,
we found the MODIS pixel that was closest to the center
of each 50-m coastline segment. Because the SST data
were coarser than the kelp canopy data (1 km vs. 50 m),
the resolution of the synchrony–distance analysis for
SST was limited to 1 km.

Large waves associated with storm events are a
major source of disturbance for kelp populations in
southern California (Dayton and Tegner 1984, Reed et
al. 2008). Wave events can also induce synchrony in the
recovery of kelp populations by removing existing
canopy, thereby reducing shading and promoting
juvenile growth (Graham et al. 1997). We calculated
local wave disturbance using significant wave height
measurements from the Coastal Data Information
Project’s (CDIP) swell model (available online).7 This
swell model used a linear refraction–diffraction wave
propagation model to transform offshore deep-water
buoy measurements of the wave field to locations along
the coast at a 10-m depth (O’Reilly and Guza 1993).
The model provided hourly data at 10-m depth for
points spaced 1 km apart across our entire study area.
We calculated the maximum significant wave height in
each month at each model analysis location. Maximum
significant wave height was used rather than mean
significant wave height because extreme wave events
have the greatest effect on kelp populations (Denny
1988). As we did with the SST data, we matched each
model analysis location with the nearest 50-m coastline
segment.

Sea urchins are responsible for the vast majority of kelp
biomass lost to herbivory (Harrold and Pearse 1987);
grazing rates of other fish and invertebrates in California
kelp forests are generally low (Foster and Schiel 1985).
Red and purple sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus franciscanus, S. purpuratus) are by far the most abundant species of urchin in southern California and account for most of
the kelp grazing in this region (Foster and Schiel 1985).
Spatial autocorrelation in sea urchin abundance, and by
extension rates of kelp grazing, could cause synchrony in
kelp populations at scales corresponding to the scales of
autocorrelation in urchin abundance. However, causality
could also operate in the opposite direction, as consumer
synchrony could be driven by producer abundance. In
either case we would expect correspondence between the
scales of synchrony in changes in kelp and urchin
abundances. We used data from annual surveys of the
combined density of red and purple sea urchins at 32
transects along the Santa Barbara coastline and 18
transects along the San Clemente coastline (red crosses
in Fig. 1a) to examine synchrony in herbivore dynamics.
The 50 transects were located between 20 m and 300 km
apart, and the median pairwise distance between transects
was 60 km. Red and purple urchins were counted by
divers in six 1-m2 quadrats uniformly spaced along fixed
40 3 2 m transects. Surveys were conducted at each
transect once per year during the summer; 11 years of
data (2000–2010) were collected at the Santa Barbara
sites and 8 years of data (2000–2007) were collected at the
San Clemente sites. Sea urchins are long lived, and so
annual sampling is sufficient to characterize their
population dynamics (Ebert and Southon 2003). Kelp
forests that are heavily impacted by urchin grazing often
display relatively low and stable levels of kelp abundance
(i.e., dampened seasonal cycles in abundance) for
multiple years (Lawrence 1975). Therefore, long-term
changes in urchin dynamics have the potential to
influence synchrony measured on monthly to seasonal
time scales.

While the macroscopic stage of giant kelp is sedentary
and firmly anchored to the bottom, its microscopic
spores disperse freely in the water column and typically
travel distances on the order of meters to kilometers
before settling to the seafloor (Reed et al. 2006a). Once
spores settle to the bottom, they require firm substrate
and sufficient light and nutrients for successful recruitment (Graham et al. 2007). The amount of light and
nutrients available to recently settled spores can vary
greatly in space and time (Deysher and Dean 1986).
Therefore spatial autocorrelation in these variables
could create spatial patterns in kelp recruitment, which
could in turn impact synchrony in adult populations
(Nisbet and Bence 1989). If this is the case, then patterns
of synchrony in kelp recruitment should resemble those
of adult density as determined by Landsat imagery. We
used annual surveys of the density of giant kelp juveniles
,1 year old (defined as all individuals with fewer than
three fronds) from 32 transects along the Santa Barbara
coastline and 18 transects along the San Clemente
coastline (red crosses in Fig. 1a) to examine synchrony
in recruitment at scales of 50 m–300 km. Surveys were conducted along the same transects used for the urchin
surveys previously described

Researchers have long called for more interaction
between the fields of population and landscape ecology
(Levin 1992, Wiens 1997). This study demonstrates how
remote sensing and geospatial analysis techniques, widely
used by landscape ecologists, can be combined with time
series analysis of population dynamics to analyze spatial
autocorrelation in populations. This approach can help
address the well-recognized problem that many conclusions regarding spatial population dynamics are limited
by the scale of the study design (Wiens 1989, Bjørnstad et
al. 1999b). Landsat TM provides relatively uninterrupted
coverage from 1984 to 2011, and so these methods can be
applied to examine long-term synchrony patterns in other
habitats where changes in species abundance can be
quantified from satellite imagery (e.g., seagrasses, coral
reefs, wetlands, grasslands). However, the ability to
observe synchrony over multiple generations will depend
on the life span of the species in question, and so these
techniques may not be applicable for habitats made up of
long-lived species (e.g., pine forests). In these cases it may
be more informative to examine synchrony in phenology
or recruitment.

The spatial resolution (50 m) and extent (550 km) of
our study spanned over five orders of magnitude. The
spatial resolution was fine enough to cover the spatial
scales of dispersal for this species (meters to kilometers
[Reed et al. 2006a, Alberto et al. 2010]), while the extent
was large enough to examine the spatial structure of
large-scale environmental controls that are known to
influence giant kelp populations (Graham et al. 2007).
The temporal resolution and extent were sufficient to
capture intra-annual as well as interannual variation in
kelp biomass. Between 2000 and 2011 we identified a twostep decrease in synchrony with distance: an initial
exponential decrease between 50 m and 1.3 km, followed
by a large-scale exponential decrease between 1.3 and 172
km. The large difference in the spatial scales of these two
patterns suggests that multiple processes are responsible
for synchronizing giant kelp populations. Lande et al.
(1999) demonstrated that small-scale dispersal could
induce synchrony on much larger scales if the dispersal
rate (roughly speaking, the fraction of the local population that disperses per unit time) is large relative to the strength of density dependence. However, only the spores
of giant kelp disperse, so that, as a fraction of biomass,
the dispersal rate (sensu Lande et al. 1999) is quite small.
Since giant kelp dispersal is limited to relatively short
distances (meters to kilometers [Reed et al. 2006a,
Alberto et al. 2010]), and there are a variety of densitydependent processes acting at the local scale that impact the growth and mortality of giant kelp (reviewed in Schiel
and Foster 2006), we do not think that dispersal is
playing a major role in long-range synchrony.
Grazing by sea urchins and local processes that
influence recruitment of giant kelp likely explain some
of the initial exponential decrease in kelp canopy
biomass synchrony between 50 m and 1.3 km. Synchrony in both urchin abundance and kelp recruitment was
positive and significant at small scales, but declined
rapidly on spatial scales similar to the initial exponential
decrease in kelp synchrony (Fig. 3c, d). Grazing may
induce synchrony in kelp populations by causing
mortality that is spatially autocorrelated at local scales.
The processes controlling recruitment include dispersal
limitation of planktonic spores, bottom irradiance,
sedimentation, competition, and grazing. Fertilization
in giant kelps occurs after dispersal and requires dense
spore settlement (.1 spore/mm2), thereby limiting the
effective dispersal distance in giant kelp (Reed et al.
1991). Reed et al. (2006b) performed a series of empirical
and modeling studies of spore dispersal and estimated
that the scale of dispersal in giant kelp is on the order of
meters to kilometers. This result agrees with theoretical
diffusive models of dispersal that show exponential
decreases in spatial autocorrelation with distance on
spatial scales similar to the scale of average dispersal
(Bjørnstad et al. 1999b, Okubo and Levin 2002: Chapter
5). While we were not able to quantify the spatial
autocorrelation of local environmental factors such as
bottom irradiance, sedimentation, and the effects of
competition, many of these features vary on small scales
and are important determinants of recruitment success for giant kelp (reviewed in Graham et al. 2007). It was
not possible for us to separate the roles of dispersal,
local environmental variability, and grazing in synchronizing kelp populations at small scales using these
observational data; manipulative studies are needed to
address this issue.

We hypothesize that the large-scale decrease in giant
kelp synchrony is primarily due to large-scale environmental controls (i.e., the Moran effect), particularly wave disturbance. The Moran effect predicts that the synchrony
of populations controlled by large-scale environmental
perturbations should decline in an identical or parallel
manner to the synchrony of the environmental variables
(Moran 1953). The length scale of this large-scale decrease
(74 km when calculated as the distance where the NCF
reaches its regional mean synchrony level) corresponded
to the length scale of the wave height NCF (61 km;
compare Fig. 2 to Fig. 3b). In addition, the double
exponential and exponential models of the kelp and wave
height NCFs flattened at similar length scales, 172 km and
120 km, respectively. The most probable mechanism by
which wave disturbance influences kelp synchrony is by
causing spatially correlated mortality on scales corresponding to the scales of wave height autocorrelation.

However, large wave events may also induce spatially
correlated recruitment and growth of kelp populations.
Wave disturbance can clear space and create light
conditions that promote the recruitment and juvenile
growth of a new cohort of giant kelp (Graham et al.
1997). Synchrony in changes in SST, a proxy for
nutrients, also declined with distance over large scales,
and so may be contributing to the large-scale decline in
kelp synchrony. Nutrient levels can strongly influence
giant kelp growth rates (Jackson 1977, Gerard 1982), and
prolonged low-nutrient conditions, such as those associated with El Nin˜o events, can cause regional-scale
mortality events (Dayton and Tegner 1984). However,
SST synchrony did not demonstrate an exponential
decline, and SST was highly autocorrelated over the
entire study area; we therefore hypothesize that wavedriven disturbance plays a larger role than nutrients in
setting the spatial scale of regional kelp synchrony. These
results are consistent with those of other studies that have
found nutrient availability and wave disturbance to be
important in accounting for regional differences in the
dynamics of giant kelp (Dayton et al. 1999, Edwards
2004, Reed et al. 2011). Sea urchins, the major grazer of
kelp, did show some positive synchrony in population
dynamics at scales of up to 60 km (Fig. 3c), and so urchins
could also play a role in large-scale kelp synchrony.
The stepwise pattern in the kelp biomass NCF was
significant in each of the 11 years of the study (Table 1 and
Appendix D: Fig. D1), demonstrating that this pattern is
evident on annual as well as interannual time scales. It is
important to note that the NCF created from the entire
time series (2000–2011; Fig. 2) represents the long-term
pattern in synchrony, and that this decadal-scale pattern
in unlikely to be observed in a given year. The relatively
high variability in both the magnitude of synchrony at
large spatial scales and the length scale of synchrony for
the annual kelp correlation functions (Table 1 and
Appendix D: Fig. D1) indicates that much of the temporal
variability in patterns of giant kelp synchrony occurs on
the larger spatial scales that appear to be regulated by
environmental factors. However, we were unable to
explain the variability in the length scale of giant kelp
using the length scale of SST or wave height. The lack of a
significant relationship between these variables may be
partly due to the complexity of the annual kelp correlation
functions. This complexity makes it difficult to quantify
the length scale of kelp synchrony. The annual kelp
correlation functions do not all follow a double exponential decline, and the point where the NCF reaches the
mean level of synchrony did not fully capture the shape of
the NCF (Appendix D: Fig. D1). Also, the relationship
between the length scale of kelp synchrony and its driving
factors is probably complex and nonlinear on short time
scales. For instance, a single large storm event can induce
large-scale synchrony in kelp populations by removing all
the kelp in a very large region (Edwards 2004). The
relationship between annual maximum wave height and
kelp mortality saturates at high wave heights (Cavanaugh
et al. 2011), and so as long as the wave heights across a
given region are all above a certain threshold, mortality
will be high and consistent across that entire region, even
if there is spatial variability in wave height across the
region. Over longer time periods the effect of these shortterm discrepancies in scale are likely averaged out by repeated cycles of disturbance and recovery.

It is especially important to understand how multiple
processes synchronize populations for systems that
function as metapopulations (see Reed et al. 2006a for
a discussion of giant kelp as a metapopulation). The
metapopulation concept refers to a collection of local
populations linked by limited dispersal, and has been
used to describe a wide variety of terrestrial (Hanski and
Gilpin 1997) and marine (Kritzer and Sale 2006 )
ecosystems. Synchrony is especially important in these
systems because metapopulation theory predicts that
higher levels of synchrony in local population dynamics
will lead to a higher probability of extinction of the
metapopulation (Heino et al. 1997, Liebhold et al.
2004). If local subpopulations fluctuate together, then
they will tend to go extinct at the same time. On the
other hand, if spatial synchrony is low, then abundant
subpopulations can contribute propagules that recolonize neighboring extinct patches, thereby increasing the
persistence of the metapopulation. For example, in an
analysis of wintering North American birds, Koenig
(2001) found a significant positive relationship between
spatial autocorrelation at short distances and the length
of extinctions of resident species. However, theoretical
studies have also shown that the degree to which spatial
synchrony impacts metapopulation persistence is highly
dependent on the spatial distribution of the subpopulations (Adler and Nuemberger 1994). Johst and Drechsler (2003) modeled metapopulations of various spatial configurations and found that increased habitat clustering increased metapopulation persistence in both static and dynamic landscapes. More empirical work is needed
to understand how the spatial distribution of subpopulations, the length scale of dispersal, and the length
scale of synchrony interact to control extinction risk in
real-world metapopulations.