
Kelp forests (Order Laminariales) form key biogenic habitats incoastal regions of temperate and Arctic seas worldwide, providingecosystem services valued in the range of billions of dollarsannually. Although local evidence suggests that kelp forests areincreasingly threatened by a variety of stressors, no comprehen-sive global analysis of change in kelp abundances currently exists.Here, we build and analyze a global database of kelp time seriesspanning the past half-century to assess regional and globaltrends in kelp abundances. We detected a high degree of geo-graphic variation in trends, with regional variability in the di-rection and magnitude of change far exceeding a small globalaverage decline (instantaneous rate of change=−0.018 y−1). Ouranalysis identified declines in 38% of ecoregions for which thereare data (−0.015 to−0.18 y−1), increases in 27% of ecoregions(0.015 to 0.11 y−1), and no detectable change in 35% of ecore-gions. These spatially variable trajectories reflected regional dif-ferences in the drivers of change, uncertainty in some regionsowing to poor spatial and temporal data coverage, and the dy-namic nature of kelp populations. We conclude that althoughglobal drivers could be affecting kelp forests at multiple scales,local stressors and regional variation in the effects of these driversdominate kelp dynamics, in contrast to many other marine andterrestrial foundation species

Kelp forests support diverse and productive ecologicalcommunities throughout temperate and arctic regions world-wide, providing numerous ecosystem services to humans. Lit-erature suggests that kelp forests are increasingly threatenedby a variety of human impacts, including climate change,overfishing, and direct harvest. We provide the first globallycomprehensive analysis of kelp forest change over the past 50y, identifying a high degree of variation in the magnitude anddirection of change across the geographic range of kelps. Theseresults suggest region-specific responses to global change,with local drivers playing an important role in driving patternsof  kelp  abundance.  Increased  monitoring  aimed  at  un-derstanding regional kelp forest dynamics is likely to provemost  effective  for  the  adaptive  management  of  theseimportant ecosystems

ssessing ecosystem change on a global scale has been in-strumental in highlighting the magnitude of human impactson natural ecosystems. For example, awareness of global declinesin fish populations (1), coral reefs (2), and tropical rainforests (3)has substantially increased public interest and subsequent polit-ical motivation for environmental conservation. In some cases,global assessments have highlighted complex patterns of change(4, 5), which often reflect variable trajectories among regions (4). However, even where clear global declines have been detected,trajectories of change are often not uniform in direction andmagnitude among regions (e.g., ref. 6). Examining patterns ofregional change can provide important insights into the mecha-nisms underlying global change, and lead to more specific rec-ommendations for local and regional management actions aimedat reversing or lessening further ecosystem degradation (7). Suchregional insights are particularly useful, as local and regionalstressors may be more amenable to management and conserva-tion actions than global stressors (8).Global declines have been documented in a number of marinehabitat-forming or“foundation”species (sensuref. 9), includingseagrasses, corals, and oysters (2, 6, 10). The loss of these speciesoften leads to a direct reduction in ecosystem services critical tohuman well-being (11–13), and the local demise of taxa thatprovide those services (14, 15). The brown algae known as kelps(Order Laminariales) are globally important foundation speciesthat occupy 43% of the world’s marine ecoregions (defined in ref.16) along coastlines of all continents except Antarctica. Kelps areuseful sentinels of change because they are highly responsive toenvironmental conditions (17, 18), and are directly exposed tomany human activities that impact the coastal zone (e.g., har-vesting, pollution, sedimentation, invasive species, fishing, recre-ation) (19). Kelps are among the most prolific primary producerson the planet, supporting productivity per unit area rivaling that ofintensively cultivated agricultural fields and tropical rainforests(20, 21). Kelps enhance diversity and secondary productivity lo-cally through the formation of biogenic habitat (22, 23), and overbroad spatial scales via detrital subsidies (24). Kelp forests supportnumerous ecosystem services, including commercial fisheries,nutrient cycling, and shoreline protection, valued in the range ofbillions of dollars annually (19, 25, 26). Consequently, changes inthe global abundance of kelps would have far reaching impacts onecosystem health and services.Historically, kelp forest ecosystems have demonstrated a highdegree of resilience (27, 28), but recent evidence suggests thatthe capacity of kelp forests to recover from disturbance may beeroding (29, 30). Kelp forest declines have now been docu-mented in many regions in response to a variety of stressors (18,31–35), but kelp abundances have been stable or increasing inother areas (17, 36, 37). Here, we amass a global database of kelpabundances to provide a comprehensive picture of kelp forestchange. Specifically, we assess the evidence for two possiblepatterns: (i) coherent patterns of change across the global rangeof kelps, with a global average trend that is large relative to re-gional variability, or (ii) regional variability that is far larger thanany global trend. The former pattern would suggest that globalstressors are the main driver of kelp forest dynamics, whereas thelatter pattern indicates a dominant influence of regional driversor region-specific responses to global drivers of change. Theresults of our analysis provide key insights into the trajectory ofone of the world’s most productive ecosystems.