The coastal forests formed by the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera are iconic and primary
habitats distributed discontinuously from central Baja California (Mexico) to central
California (USA). The giant kelp creates a biogenic habitat that supports high levels of
species diversity and productivity in the region, acting as a refuge, nursery and food
provider for many species.

Kelp forests provides ecosystem services to humans worth billions of dollars globally.
These services include food and natural products, chemical products, recreational and
commercial fisheries, ecotourism opportunities, cultural value, and nutrient cycling.
Coastal human populations rely on many of these ecosystem services.

Beyond its economic benefits, giant kelp, together with the species that inhabit the kelp
forests, play a significant role in climate control by regulating carbon flows, acting as a
reserve and sink for carbon dioxide on living tissue, and facilitating the burial of carbon
in sea bed sediments. Giant kelp and the biological communities that it supports will
likely react to climatic and non-climatic changes in complex and unexpected ways.
In California and Baja California, giant kelp forests can be expected to contract in their
southern extent due to warming waters, reductions in nutrient availability, increasing
wave disturbance and grazing by warm-water herbivores. In ecosystems shared between
nations, such as kelp forest, the actions taken by one nation invariably affect the other.
Effective management of such systems therefore requires strong cooperation.

The United States of America (USA) and Mexico together account for more than 2,600
km of coastline in the temperate sea of the Northeastern Pacific, which hosts a huge
diversity of species ranging from locally resident populations important for sustaining
food webs, to large predators and other mobile organisms that cross the national borders
regularly. At least 220 species of macroalgae (Murray and Littler 1981), 3,000 species of
marine macroinvertebrates (Cadien and Lovell 2015), 519 species of fish (Horn et al.
2006), 29 species of marine mammals (Daugherty 1985) and five species of marine
reptiles (Beltz 2006) are distributed throughout the temperate region of Northeastern
Pacific. This region is delimited by the northern border of Washington (USA) and the
southern end of the Baja California Peninsula (Mexico). Conservation of marine
biological diversity along this broad geographical region is important not only for
maintaining the demographic and genetic flow among populations on both sides of the
border, but also to maintain critical ecosystems services for coastal human populations.

The marine territory off the coast of California and Baja California is part of the
California Current System (CCS), which is one of the five most productive marine
ecosystems on the planet (Fig. 1). The CCS has a high productivity as a result of
temperate water movement towards the equator as well as favorable winds for coastal upwellings, which together generate an offshore transport of surface waters and advection
of cold and nutrient-rich waters to the surface (Checkley and Barth 2009). Throughout
the CCS, there is a diversity of oceanographic features that lead to a variety of habitat
types within the system (Spalding et al. 2007; Greene et al. 2013; Morgan et al. 2015)
(Fig. 1). Among them, coastal forests formed by the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera are
primary habitats that support the high diversity and productivity of the region, acting both
as nursery and food providers for many species.

Giant kelp forests can be considered the submerged counterparts of rain forests.
They are among the most species-rich communities in temperate seas and among the
most productive ecosystems on Earth (Schiel and Foster 2015; Reed and Brzezinski
2009). Kelp forests are a complex three-dimensional habitat structured by a second layer
of understory macroalgae attached to the sea bottom (Dawson et al. 1960). They create
biogenic habitats that provide refuge for numerous species, including many of economic
importance for fisheries (Foster and Schiel 1985; Hernández-Carmona et al. 1989; Parnell
et al. 2010a; Torres-Moye et al. 2013).

Historically, the latitudinal range of giant kelp on the west coast was thought to
extend from Sitka, Alaska, at 57N to Bahía Magdalena, Mexico, at 24N, as its
southernmost limit (Setchell and Gardner 1925; Dawson et al. 1960; Macaya and
Zuccarello 2010; Schiel and Foster 2015) (Fig. 1). Several variables acting at different scales and different life history stages of the giant kelp control those distribution limits.
Temperature and its relationship with nutrient availability, together with the availability
of hard substrate, are among the most important (Jackson 1977; Hernandez-Carmona et
al. 2001; Edwards and Hernández-Carmona 2005; Edwards and Estes 2006).
Giant kelp is an “ecosystem engineer” (sensu Jones et al. 1994) and generally the
dominant species of the community, accounting for a disproportionately large share of
the biomass in the system (Dayton 1985; Dayton et al. 1992; Steneck et al. 2002;
Rassweiler et al. 2008; Reed et al. 2008; Schiel and Foster 2015). Giant kelp can grow up
to 60 m in length at a maximum rate of 60 cm per day, with densities sometimes
exceeding 1.5 adult plants/m2 with more than 10 stipes/m2
, which explains its high contribution of biomass relative to other species in the community (Carr 1994; Edwards 2004; Reed et al. 2009). The abundance of biomass of giant kelp is very dynamic in space
and time as a result of its seasonal variations, grazing, storms, episodic oceanographic
events and long-term climate changes (Dayton and Tegner 1984; Hernández-Carmona et
al. 1989, 2001; Reed et al. 2011; Schiel and Foster 2015). 

Global climate plays a vital role in determining the distribution, structure,
function, and biodiversity of giant kelp forests. As a result of rapid atmospheric climate
change, coastal water temperature, nutrient availability, pH, wave disturbance, and sea
level are all changing or forecast to change in coming decades (IPCC 2013, 2014).
Overlaid on these large-scale stressors are other local stressors on giant kelp forests
resulting from coastal development and urbanization, such as runoff of sediments and
nutrients, overfishing, and invasive species. Giant kelp and the biological communities
that it supports will likely react to climatic and non-climatic changes in complex and
unexpected ways (Crain et al. 2008; Johnson et al. 2011). In California (USA) and Baja
California (Mexico), giant kelp forests may be expected to contract in their southern
extent due to warming waters, reductions in nutrient availability, and increases wave
disturbance and grazing by warm-water herbivores (Ridgway and Hill 2012). Changes in
sea level are harder to predict but could lead to increases or decreases in available habitat
depending on nearshore bathymetry and coastal management (e.g., shoreline armoring).

We should also expect direct and indirect effects of climate change on kelp forest
organisms. Members of kelp forest communities, especially calcifying organisms or those
existing near their thermal limits, may change in abundance and distribution in response
to warming and ocean acidification (OA). Changes in the abundance and distribution of
giant kelp will have indirect effects on fishes and invertebrates that depend on giant kelp
for shelter or food, as well as competing species of algae that thrive in the absence of
giant kelp. Ecological surprises such as complex, cascading interactions, the immigration
of novel species, or unexpected local adaption to climate stressors are very likely and
challenge our ability to accurately predict the future of giant kelp forests in a changing
climate.

In ecosystems shared between nations, such as kelp forest, the actions taken by
one nation invariably affect the other. Effective management of such systems therefore
most commonly one that involves strong cooperation. The research benefits realized from
international initiatives are as essential to scientific progress as they are to environmental
preservation. Understanding how climate change will impact nearshore ecosystems, such 
as the large kelp forests along the California and Baja California coasts, will require
geographically extensive assessments of these effects and solid understanding of the
ecology and oceanography of this region.

Early in the last century (1910) the population of California was 2.4 million, while Baja
California had only 9,760 inhabitants. By the end of 2015, the population of California
increased more than 11-fold to 39.14 Million and the population of Baja California more
than 300-fold to 3.15 million (US Census Bureau; Mexico National Institute of Statistics
and Geography-INEGI). This population growth significantly exceeded the growth rate
of total population in the respective countries, due to a mixture of migration, economic
expansion, and political developments (Rubin-Kurtzman et al. 1996). Population growth
increased pressure on local ecosystem services, and signs of over-exploitation have been
documented in the region (Clough-Riquelme and Bringas-Rábago 2006; Shaw et al.
2011). Resources that sustain quality of life have shown signs of deterioration, including
air and fresh water (Cramer 1998; Mumme 1999). For example, overfishing has led to
major declines in some fisheries in this region (Tegner and Dayton 2000; Schroeder and
Love 2002; Erisman et al. 2011).

Kelp forests provide ecosystem services to humans worth billions of dollars
globally (Costanza et al. 1997, 1998; Carr and Reed 2016). These valuable services
include food and natural products (Leachman 1921; Mead 1976), chemical products
(Neushul 1987), recreational and commercial fisheries (Dayton et al. 1998; Tegner and
Dayton 2000), ecotourism opportunities (Pendleton and Rooke 2006), cultural value
(Leachman 1921), wave and current attenuation (Gaylord et al. 2007; Garden and Smith
2015), and nutrient cycling (Jackson 1977; Wilmers et al. 2012). As ecosystem engineers,
kelps transform marine habitats by controlling sediment dynamics, reducing the turbulent
mixing beneath the canopy and controlling the water flow. Altogether, this causes fairly
uniform vertical currents within the kelp forest with less shear than outside, which results
in shoreline protection (Jackson 1983; Eckman et al. 1989; Rosman et al. 2007; Stewart
et al. 2009; Garden and Smith 2015).

Since the early 1900s the harvest of giant kelp has been an important source of
food, chemicals, fertilizers, and alginates, and more recently kelp has been used as animal
feed (Schiel and Foster 2015). Harvest occurred along the coast of California and Baja
California, although the major effort was concentrated from Santa Barbara to San Diego
and in the northern Baja California region, from Playas de Tijuana to El Rosario
(Robledo 1998; Bedford 2001; Casas-Valdez et al. 2003). Kelp harvest became the
largest industry ever created from the processing of marine plants in the United States
(Neushul 1987). Global demand for alginate has continued in recent decades and the
industry has an estimated value of $ 318 million, but the large-scale harvest of giant kelp
in California and Baja California ended in 2006 due to increased production costs and the
opening of foreign markets (Bixler and Porse 2010; Schiel and Foster 2015). Following the closure of the industrial harvest of giant kelp, an artisanal harvest has remained on
both sides of the border to produce feed for abalone farms (Schiel and Foster 2015).

Aesthetic characteristics and the ecological significance of kelp forests attract a
large number of visitors who participate year-round in a variety of recreational activities
such as diving, snorkeling, kayaking, and boating. Tourism and recreation are one of the
main economic sectors for both California and Baja California, contributing 22% of the
gross state product of California (Kildow and Colgan 2005) and up to 12% for Baja
California (SECTURE 2000). Activities related to the sea in California are estimated to
involve up to 12.2 million people annually (Pendleton and Rooke 2006), of which kelp
forest-related activities are a significant part (Schiel and Foster 2015). Snorkeling and
diving are two important marine recreational activities in California, in 2000 alone, there
were an estimated 1.38 million dives and 3.82 million snorkeler-days (Leeworthy and
Wiley 2001). In 2000, estimates put the annual value of scuba diving in California at $20-
69 million and the annual value of snorkeling activities at $19-114 million in 2000
(Pendleton and Rooke 2006). Other marine recreational activities potentially related to
the use of kelp forest ecosystems, such as kayaking, wildlife viewing, boating, and bird
watching, account for another $72.7 million per year (Pendleton and Rooke 2006).

Reliable estimates of revenues from recreational activities related to kelp forests
in Baja California are not available. The small number of service providers, low human
populations and limited promotion of these activities suggest that revenues are lower in
Baja California than in California. Nevertheless, the economic potential for marine
recreational activities in Baja California is well understood and potentially large (GEBC
2015a). The gross value of tourism for Baja California in 2001 was $2.59 billion (GEBC
2015b) and recreational activities generated $3.79 million.
Fisheries associated to kelp forest provide economic and social support for the
region. Throughout the CCS, several species of invertebrates such as abalone (Haliotis
spp.), lobster (Panulirus interruptus), and sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus spp.), in
addition to species of fish including giant sea bass (Stereolepis gigas), white sea bass
(Atractoscion nobilis), yellowtail (Seriola lalandi), rockfishes (Sebastes spp.), kelp bass
(Paralabrax clathratus), and California sheephead (Semicossyphus pulcher), are caught
both recreationally and commercially, from shore or at sea (Love et al. 2002). It is
impossible to isolate the effects of kelp forests versus other habitats on these fisheries
because most species are not exclusive to one habitat type. California commercial fishing
generated around $113 billion in sales in 2008, while the recreational fishery generated
$106 billion in sales, including $55 million for the issue of fishing licenses (CDFG 2009).
Commercial fishing generated 1.5 million jobs, and the recreational sector accounted for
another 534,000 (NOAA 2008). Commercial fishery revenues in Baja California
currently are much lower. Approximately $27 million and 30,628 direct jobs (SEPESCA
2015) were generated by these activities and about $127,000 were collected from sales of
sport fishing permits in 2008 (Sosa-Nishizaki et al. 2013).

Beyond its economic benefits, giant kelp, together with the species that inhabit the
kelp forests, may play a significant role in climate control by regulating carbon flows,
acting as a reserve or sink for carbon dioxide on living tissue, and facilitating the burial
of carbon in sea bed sediments. By increasing kelp biomass, atmospheric carbon dioxide 
could potentially be reduced and sequestered in a reservoir where it could remain for long
periods of time by exporting drifting algae to the deep sea (Wilmers et al. 2012).
However, Reed and Brzezinski (2009) argue that, unlike other coastal ecosystems, kelp
forests contribute little to carbon sequestration because the vast majority of kelp carbon is
rapidly degraded and re-mineralized, and the main storage of kelp carbon is in the
standing biomass. 

The equator-ward flow of the California current in the CCS and its coastal
countercurrents promote the transport of larvae and early-stage individuals throughout the
region and influence the distribution of the adult stages of many species (Horn et al.
2006). Several studies have documented the relationship between species populations on
the two sides of the USA-Mexico border in terms of distribution (Horn et al. 2006), larval
dispersal (Cowen 1985; Funes-Rodriguez et al. 2015), migration (Aalbers and Sepulveda
2015) and genetic connectivity (Iacchei et al. 2013; Munguía-Vega et al. 2015;
Johannson et al. 2015). The white sea bass (Atractoscion nobilis) is a good example of a
trans-boundary resource with documented population connectivity across the border that
supports both recreational and commercial fisheries (Vojkovich and Reed 1983; Aalbers
and Sepulveda 2015; Romo-Curiel et al. 2016). Historically, the USA fishing fleet has
been larger than the Mexican fleet, in terms of both vessels and landings within Mexican
waters. Reports show that in some years up to 80% of the total landings by the
commercial fleet of California were from in Mexican waters (Vojkovich and Reed 1983).
After a decline in commercial catches in the 1960s, restoration strategies were adopted in
California with little success. Research interest on both sides of the border has fostered a
new effort to determine the population dynamics of the species across its entire
distribution (Aalbers and Sepulveda 2015; Romo-Curiel et al. 2016).

Recent studies of the spiny lobster (Panulirus interruptus), one of the most
important commercial fisheries in the region, showed high connectivity among
populations along its distribution in the Pacific (Miller 2014). Genetic differentiations
that have been found between some populations can be explained by coastal upwelling
(Iacchei et al. 2013; Funes-Rodriguez et al. 2015). A similar pattern has also been
observed in populations of barred sand bass (Paralabrax nebulifer) throughout the
Pacific USA-Mexico region. Despite the decline of populations due to commercial
fishing pressure in California and Baja California, there is a high degree of genetic
diversity and genetic mixing (Erisman et al. 2011). These results suggest the existence of
a single large population of barred sand bass in the Northeastern Pacific, reiterating the
trans-national nature of marine species in the region (Paterson et al. 2015).

Several surface canopy-forming kelp species have distributions that encompass
both California and Baja California. These are the giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera), elk
kelp (Pelagophycus porra), and feather boa kelp (Egregia menziesii). Out of these three
species, giant kelp is the most thoroughly studied. Empirical and theoretical studies of
giant kelp dispersal (Gaylord et al. 2006; Hernández-Carmona et al. 2006; Reed et al.
2006), spatial analysis population analyses (Cavanaugh et al. 2014; Castorani et al. 2015),
and molecular tools (Alberto et al. 2011) have improved our understanding of the
propagule dispersal, patch and metapopulation dynamics, population genetics, and
molecular ecology of this species. These studies suggest that spore transport by
oceanographic currents is an important determinant of population and demographic
connectivity among giant kelp patches (Alberto et al. 2011; Castorani et al. 2015;
Johannson et al. 2015). While population connectivity depends primarily on the absolute
number of dispersers between populations, demographic connectivity depends on the
relative contribution to the growth rates of the population of dispersers and local
recruitment (Lowe and Allendorf 2010). The spore dispersal between patches of kelp
forests is not limited enough to prevent demographic connectivity, yet not broad enough
to result in homogenous, panmictic populations (Gaylord et al. 2006; Reed et al. 2006;
Alberto et al. 2011). Demographic connectivity can strongly determine the population
dynamics of giant kelp, increasing the probability of colonization and persistence through
time (Castorani et al. 2015).

Kellet's whelk (Kelletia kelletii) is an abundant predator in the kelp
forest ecosystem and an emerging fishery in California since 1979 (Hubbard 2008).
Zacherl et al. (2003), using microchemistry in larval protoconchs and statoliths of Kellet's
whelk, found that populations north and south of California’s Point Conception showed a
different chemical composition that might reflect differences in the population source
providing recruits. Similarly, Torres-Moye (2012) examined the genetic diversity
between island and coastal populations of the limpet Megathura crenulata and sea star
Patiria miniata using the mitochondrial DNA control region. He suggests that the short
larval duration of the M. crenulata, combined with intense harvest pressure, may limit the
dispersal capabilities of this species, compared with the sea star P. miniata.
Studies of the sea star Pisaster ochraceus along the CCS (Vancouver Island to
Punta San Carlos, Baja California) using mitochondrial DNA suggest that genetic
homogeneity exists among populations, due to the transport of larvae along the CCS that
coincides with the reproductive peak of this species (March to June), when the current
has a strong southward flow (Fontana-Uribe 2005). Studies of the pink abalone (Haliotis
corrugata) found a low to moderate genetic diversity at five locations of the northeastern
Pacific of Mexico and the USA (Díaz-Viloria et al. 2009).

Many fish species have restricted movement when adults; however, for species
with pelagic larvae ocean currents may disperse them over large distances—up to
hundreds of kilometers (Kinlan and Gaines 2003; Freiwald 2012). California sheephead
(Semicossyphus pulcher), kelp bass (Paralabrax clathratus), and kelp rockfish (Sebastes
atrovirens) are some of the most abundant species throughout the trans-boundary region
and are subject to commercial and recreational fisheries; however, their management and
conservation are performed independently in each country. 

The connectivity of California sheephead populations has been examined by
recruitment, genetic analysis and ocean circulation patterns. Cowen (1985) use a
combination of field counts and age-structure data to suggests that larval supply to
populations in the Southern California bight is variable and relies on anomalous
recruitment related with El Niño or La Niña events, with warm northward flow carrying
the larvae of these and other species into the waters of California (Cowen 1985; Methot
et al. 2004). Selkoe et al. (2007) used three different datasets including time series of
larval abundance and microsatellite markers analysis to investigate whether California
sheephead and kelp bass populations depend on Mexican populations. They found very
localized population connectivity and very little exchange between California and Baja
California populations. Bernardi et al. (2003), using DNA analysis, found the presence of
population structure between northern and southern Baja California populations in some
kelp-associated fish species like opaleye (Girella nigricans) and sargo (Anisotremus
davidsoni), but no structure in others (Halichoeres semicinctus and Semicossyphus
pulcher).

In sum, several approaches have been used to study connectivity along the
California Current System, such as recruitment and ocean circulation patterns (Cowen
1985; Cowen et al. 2006; White et al. 2010), microchemistry (Simmonds et al. 2014;
Zacherl 2005; Warner et al. 2005), and genetics (Palumbi 1995; Fontana-Uribe 2005;
White et al. 2010; Torres-Moye 2012). Whilst some of the outcomes from these
population connectivity studies show the importance of local fisheries management
schemes, the majority suggest that regional management is the most appropriate strategy
for future interventions.

Ecological comparisons between kelp forest communities in California and Baja
California has been challenging, as the majority of data collected from different
monitoring programs are not standardized. However, seminal work by Edwards (2004)
shows responses and impacts of the El Niño 1997-1998 from central California to its
southernmost limit in Baja California. Existing monitoring programs range in taxonomic
complexity from exhaustive lists including both conspicuous and cryptic fish,
macroinverterbrates, and macroalgae (Vantuna Research Group, UABC), to programs
that capture the majority of non-cryptic biodiversity (SDSU, Partnership for the
Interdisciplinary Study of Coastal Oceans: PISCO, COBI-Stanford) and programs that
focus on key species of economic or ecological importance (Reef Check CA, Channel
Islands National Park Service: CINPS). Sampling effort (sites and years) also varies
among programs.

Daily sea surface temperatures have been recorded at several locations along the
California coast as part of the Shore Station Program, with temperature records going
back nearly a century at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography Pier in southern
California and Pacific Grove in central California. Paleo-climate records, mainly in the
form of sediment cores from anoxic basins within the wide southern California shelf,
extend our knowledge of climatic fluctuations within the CCS much further back in time
(Schimmelmann and Lange 1996). Together, these records provide evidence that
temperatures and productivity within the CCS have fluctuated greatly in the past, and that
the ecology of pelagic ecosystems responds strongly to these fluctuations (McGowan et
al. 2003; Di Lorenzo et al. 2013).

In contrast, the paleo-record for inner shelf benthos communities, such as kelp
forests, is sparse or non-existent (Braje et al. 2009). However, cartographic and aerial
photographic records extend our knowledge of kelp canopy coverage back to the
beginning of the 20th century in some areas, with annual resolution in southern California
available from the 1960s onward. Further, for benthic algae that do not produce a
floating canopy at the surface, populations have been studied for the past several decades
using in situ diver surveys such as those associated with the CINPS kelp forest
monitoring program, San Diego State University, USGS kelp forest monitoring program
at San Nicolas Island, the coordinated PISCO, California Reef Check, Santa Barbara
Coastal Long Term Ecological Research program, and numerous independent academic
research groups. Together, these activities have shown that benthic macroalgae and kelp
canopy cover are highly sensitive to seasonal, inter-annual and decadal-scale fluctuations
in oceanographic conditions within the CCS (Jackson 1977; Dayton et al. 1984, 1999; 

The dynamic forcing of the CCS is
closely related to large-scale decadal North Pacific climate modes such as the Pacific
Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and the North Pacific Gyre Oscillation (NPGO) (Di Lorenzo
et al. 2008). These modes have been related to corresponding patterns in several
biological time series, such as the alternating anchovy/sardine cycle within the CCS.
Inter-annual and seasonal patterns of variability are superimposed onto these decadal
climate modes (Sugihara et al. 2012). Positive El Niño Southern Oscillation years
(ENSO) are associated with a deepened thermocline, warmer waters, and lower nutrients.
Positive decadal climate modes magnify these effects of El Niño. For instance, there was
a large positive shift in the PDO during the late 1970s that has been recognized as a
North Pacific-wide regime shift, with profound declines in productivity and fish stocks
within the CCS (McGowan et al. 2003; Holbrook et al. 1997; Chavez et al. 2003; Koslow
et al. 2013).

Cool, dense waters beneath the thermocline are replete in inorganic nitrogen, the
main limiting nutrient in the CCS for algal growth, while warmer waters above the
thermocline are more depleted in nitrogen (Jackson 1977). Seasonal upwelling, forced by
equatorward winds during spring and summer along the CCS, pumps sub-thermocline,
cool nutrient-rich water up onto the shelf (Huyer 1983; Checkley and Barth 2009).
However, the upwelled water is also low in oxygen and pH, thereby increasing the risks
of hypoxia and acidification to coastal ecosystems (Nam et al. 2011). Since the coastal
thermocline is depressed during positive phases of the PDO, seasonal upwelling provides
only a limited nutrient subsidy during these periods and a concomitant El Niño tends to
further limit subsidies.

The structure of the CCS changed during the regime shift of the late 1970s (Miller
et al. 1994). For instance, zooplankton volumes decreased in a step manner across this
shift (McGowan et al. 2003) and the CCS has freshened and warmed since that time
(Bograd et al. 2003; Di Lorenzo et al. 2005). Concomitant increases in the stratification
of coastal waters, which decrease mixing of nutrient rich sub-thermocline waters with
nutrient-depleted surface waters (Bograd et al. 2003), and subsequent decreases in
oxygen content within the surface waters were also observed during this shift (Bograd et
al. 2008)

Major secular trends have been observed since the
regime shift of the 1970s. These include further warming and freshening of the CCS,
decreasing oxygen and pH, a thickening and shoaling of the oxygen minimum zone (a
zone of low oxygen between 300 and 500 m deep off California), and rising sea levels.
These trends are superimposed onto cyclical decadal ocean climate modes, and thus
represent potential thresholds for potent regime shifts in the future.
Adding to this uncertainty is the likelihood that upwelling winds will increase with
global warming, perhaps buffering the nutrient risk to coastal ecosystems such as kelp
forests while further exacerbating hypoxia and OA (Bakun 1990; Rykaczewski and
Dunne 2010). The degree to which humans have contributed to these secular trends has 
been the subject of much debate, but it is clear that warming and sea level rise will
continue on a global scale (Stocker 2014). Storms, a major source of disturbance for kelp
forests (Bell et al. 2015), may also continue to intensify as they appear to have done in
the North Pacific in the latter half of the 20th century (Seymour et al. 1989; Graham and
Diaz 2001).

Sea level will rise ~1 m by the end of this century, though recent evidence of ice
instability and the risk of ice collapse in the West Antarctic Peninsula and the Greenland
Ice Shelf suggest that global sea level could rise much faster (Dutton et al. 2015). On a
local scale, sea level rise may cause giant kelp to migrate shoreward in order to track
changes in light availability (Kinlan et al. 2005; Graham et al. 2007). In areas with insular
kelp forests or where shorelines are reinforced to prevent coastal erosion, sea level rise
may constrict the effective habitat area for giant kelp growth (Graham et al. 2007). In
contrast, the impact of sea level rise on giant kelp distributions will probably be minimal
on linear, unmodified coastlines (Graham et al. 2007).

Climate change will also cause indirect, habitat-mediated effects on kelp forest
communities if warming does impact the abundance and distribution of giant kelp. It is
likely that the nature and functioning of kelp forests will change, especially south of
Point Conception (Parnell et al. 2010b). The distribution of giant kelp may even exhibit
long-term contraction similar to short-term contractions observed during previous ENSOs
(Ladah et al. 1999; Edwards and Hernández-Carmona 2005). While short-term patterns
provide much needed insight into how the range limits of kelp forests are impacted by
ENSO conditions, it is unclear how continued warming of eastern Pacific coastal waters
will impact future range shifts in these forests that may result from ENSO events.

Human activities have become ecological drivers of kelp forest communities,
through pollution from storm water and wastewater, land use practices that affect coastal
sedimentation, and disposal of dredged sediments (Dayton et al. 1998). The introduction
of exotic species and serial overfishing of key predators and herbivores can affect nontargeted species via interactive cascades among interdependent species (e.g., Byrnes et al.
2006). All of these effects have been well documented and are known with relative
certainty. It is clear that changes in ocean temperature and acidity may interact with one
another and/or have differing impacts on these forests, further complicating the issue
(Brown et al. 2014; Gaitán-Espitia et al. 2014).

One of the most studied processes in kelp forests is the dynamic relationship
between kelp grazers and their predators, which can be greatly impacted by humans who
harvest both (Mann 1982; Dayton 1985). Sea urchins are the most important kelp grazers,
and their fecundity and grazing activity are so great that they can quickly overgraze entire
kelp forests (Estes and Palmisano 1974; Ebeling et al. 1985). These areas, termed ‘urchin
barrens’, are typically less productive and diverse than forested areas, and they can
persist for decades (Graham 2004). Classical “top-down” control of kelp forests by sea
otters (Enhydra lutris), voracious predators of sea urchins, has been suggested for central
California kelp forests (Tinker et al. 2008; Carr and Reed 2016). Sea urchin outbreaks
and overgrazing have been attributed to the removal of sea urchin predators such as large
spiny lobsters and California sheephead (Semicossyphus pulcher) in southern California
forests (Hamilton and Caselle 2015). There is also evidence that protecting areas from
harvest in MPAs reduces sea urchin overgrazing, thereby enhancing production,
diversity, and resilience to disturbances such as storms (Nichols et al. 2015).
Living in highly-variable nearshore environments, giant kelp has developed
acclimation mechanisms to cope with temperature variability (Koch et al. 2016).

However, extreme temperatures may play a role in determining latitudinal range limits in
giant kelp, which has evolved to grow along a 30-degree latitudinal range in the
Northeast Pacific Ocean spanning a temperature gradient from less than 2°C to over 20°C
(Graham et al. 2007; Macaya and Zuccarello 2010). Warming could expand giant kelp
forests at high latitudes, but polar distributions are also constrained by low light and
herbivory (Gaines and Lubchenco 1982; Van den Hoek 1982; Jackson 1987). At low
latitudes, giant kelp distributions are thought to be limited by warm temperatures, low
nutrients, and competition with other species of macroalgae (Steneck et al. 2002; Schiel
and Foster 2015). 

Two recent events provide excellent case studies on the ecological effects of
warming on giant kelp forests and provide hints at potential future scenarios. In central
California, a thermal outfall from the Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant heated a small
cove by an average of +3.5 °C for a decade (1985–1995). In a rigorous 18-year study
carried out before and after warming, Schiel et al. (2004) found that elevated
temperatures created ecological ‘winners’ that were mainly southern species that can
colonize and compete for resources, and ‘losers’, that were northern affinity species
which distribution may be contracted north or adapt to new conditions, algae and
invertebrates among them, with 38% increasing, 49% decreasing, and 13% showing no
change relative to control areas.

Another recent study found equally surprising results. From late 2013 to 2016,
anomalously warm water in the northeastern Pacific Ocean (dubbed “the Blob”) followed
by very strong El Niño conditions caused rapid warming of coastal waters along the coast
of California and Baja California (Cavole et al. 2016; Di Lorenzo & Mantua 2016).
Despite anomalously high temperatures for 31 of 34 months (up to 5 °C above the 1982–
2014 average) and low nutrients (< 1 µmol nitrate L–1
) for 19 of 34 months, the abundance and composition of giant kelp, understory macroalgae, sessile invertebrates, and reef fishes did not change substantially in this particular region of southern California
(Reed et al. in review). Sea urchins and sea stars, however, declined dramatically due to 
diseases that can be magnified by warming (Reed et al. in review). The combined effects
of the warm Blob and El Niño during 2015–2016 devastated giant kelp and red sea urchin
populations in southern Baja California (G. Torres-Moye personal observation). Changes
associated with the Blob event, but also reported for El Niño seasons, have included
geographical shifts of species such as pelagic red crabs and tuna; the decline or closure of
commercially important fisheries, including market squid and Dungeness crab; and the
stranding of marine mammals and seabirds (Lea and Rosenblatt 2000; Chavez et al. 2002;
Cavole et al. 2016). 

In addition to more variable physical conditions and extreme events, the CCS is
subject to a suite of chemical changes associated with climate change, including OA and
hypoxia (Feely et al. 2008; Chan et al. 2008; Doney et al. 2009). In particular, severe
hypoxic conditions have been observed off the coast of Oregon, USA, since 2002 and
subsequently at other locations within the California Current (Chan et al. 2008; Micheli
et al. 2012; Booth et al. 2014). Both et al. (2014) examine data of water quality
monitoring program and found that dissolved oxygen (DO) had declined up to four times
faster than offshore waters over the last 15 years, such low dissolved oxygen levels have
no precedent over the past 50 years (Chan et al. 2008; Booth et al. 2014; Chu et al. 2015).
Seasonal events of OA, are already appearing along the continental shelf of CCS, with
the upwelling of corrosive seawater, approximately 40 years earlier than predicted by
models (Feely et al. 2008; Doney et al. 2009). Concurrently, over the past 50 years,
oceanographic measurements have revealed negative trends of DO concentrations in
waters overlaying the Oxygen Minimum Zone (OMZ), naturally oxygen-depleted deep
waters found between 600-1200 m depths (Stramma et al. 2008). The OMZ has shoaled
by 90 m off southern California (Bograd et al. 2008), and circulation models predict that
the oxygen content of the global ocean will decrease by 1-7% over the next century
(Keeling et al. 2010). Documentation of climate-driven hypoxia on continental shelves
and coastal areas (Chan et al. 2008; Booth et al. 2014) and the observed acidification
trends (Feely et al. 2008; Doney et al. 2009) suggest that hypoxia and acidification will
have important influences on the structure, function and flow of services of coastal
marine ecosystems. 

Kelp forests provide a wide range of ecosystem services above and beyond those
discussed previously, including nutrient cycling, biodiversity, wave attenuation, cultural
heritage and the resilience of marine and coastal ecosystems. Although poorly evaluated
to date, these services nevertheless are vital to human welfare. The biogenic structure that
kelp creates may help prevent coastal damage caused by erosion, floods, and storm
events (Smale et al. 2013). Giant kelp can reduce currents and dampen higher frequency
internal waves (Rosman et al. 2007). The effect of attenuation is correlated with the
extent, density, and morphology of canopy-forming kelps and understory macroalgae
assemblages (Eckman et al., 1989; Gaylord et al. 2007; Rosman et al. 2007).

The species diversity in kelp forests, while supporting some of the
aforementioned ecosystem services, may also enhance the productivity and ecological 
resilience of the ecosystem, increasing also its ability to implement internal mechanism
that ameliorate the impact of a disturbance (Léveque 2003; Hughes and Stachowicz
2004). Numerically abundant species in kelp forest systems are unlikely to go extinct as a
result of human pressures, but habitat fragmentation and population decline are expected
to reduce the genetic diversity within populations (Hughes and Stachowicz 2004). How
to estimate the economic value of biodiversity is not well understood. Diversity could
affect a wide variety of services that humans receive from ecosystems, underscoring the
need for resource management to consider the important role of maintaining biodiversity
(Beaumont et al. 2008). Biodiversity is maintained by genetic, species and functional
diversity within an ecosystem. The loss of the former can often result in the loss of the
latter two. Biodiversity associated with kelp forests (Graham et al. 2007) may represent a
reservoir of genetic diversity and resources for future use (Vasquez et al. 2013).
Atmospheric climate change may be altering nutrient delivery to giant kelp forests
by changing the frequency and intensity of upwelling in the eastern North Pacific Ocean.

When nutrient limitation causes widespread extinction, such as during very strong El
Niño events, demographic connectivity with remnant populations (Castorani et al. 2015)
or deep-water populations (Ladah and Zertuche-González 2004), or local survival of
latent developmental stages (Carney et al. 2013), may be important for recovery. For
shorter, seasonal episodes of limited upwelling, other sources of nitrogen may sustain
giant kelp growth and persistence, including terrestrial runoff or ammonium excreted by
reef animals or effluxed from sediment (Hepburn and Hurd 2005; Fram et al. 2008;
Brzezinski et al. 2013). However, relatively little is known about the role of ammonium
in supporting giant kelp through low-nitrate periods, nor whether ammonium dynamics
will shift under climate change (Brzezinski et al. 2013; Schiel and Foster 2015). 

Although nutrient availability can limit persistence, giant kelp has the potential to
adapt to local conditions. In laboratory experiments and field transplantations, giant kelp
from warm-water populations has greater survival and growth under warm, low-nutrient
conditions than giant kelp from colder-water populations (North 1971; Kopczak et al.
1991). With climate-driven changes to nutrients and temperatures anticipated in the
coming century, more work is needed to assess the scales and consequences of local
adaptation in giant kelp (Johansson et al. 2015; Schiel and Foster 2015).
Since the 1950s, wave energy has increased globally, including in the eastern
North Pacific Ocean (Bromirski et al. 2003; Gulev and Grigorieva 2004; Menéndez et al.
2008; Ruggiero et al. 2010; Seymour 2011; Young et al. 2011). Under most emissions
scenarios, climate models predict increasing wave magnitudes in temperate regions,
including western North America, due in part to increasing frequencies of large cyclones
in the South Pacific and storm intensification in the North Pacific (Easterling et al. 2000;
Wang and Swail 2006a, 2006b, Leslie et al. 2007; Meehl et al. 2007; Semedo et al. 2013).
Ongoing and future intensification of waves may have important repercussions for the
distributions and dynamics of giant kelp forests, potentially leading to persistent local
extinctions of giant kelp and shifts in the benthic community towards understory algae
that are more resistant to large swells (Dayton et al. 1992, 1999; Byrnes et al. 2011). 

Unfortunately, there is limited and sometimes-conflicting information about the
direct effects of OA on kelp forest organisms (e.g., Dillon 2014; Fernandez-Subiabre
2015). Most studies suggest that non-calcifying algal species, such as giant kelp, will
experience few negative effects and may possibly benefit from OA, for example, by
increasing photosynthesis (Harley et al. 2012, Koch et al. 2013, Schiel and Foster 2015).
The potential for marine species to adapt to OA is not well known and community effects
may vary. Harley et al. (2012) hypothesized that, in contrast to the negative direct and
indirect effects of warming, giant kelp from the southern range limits may respond
positively to direct and indirect OA effects. The combination of species-specific OA
impacts has the potential to reshape kelp forest community structure, shifting competitive
interactions between fleshy and turf algae species and/or increasing grazing activity of
abundant herbivores that feed on kelp (Hepburn et al. 2011; Dillon 2014).

We can safely assume that population connectivity of animals associated with
kelp forest in California and Baja California is mainly regulated by oceanographic
processes. Nevertheless, a lack of accurate, quantitative descriptions of ocean circulation
at different scales, as well as the increase on frequency and intensity of oceanographic
variability generated by climate change, limit our understanding of connectivity
processes. Few studies have examined the connectivity of kelp forest species across
different spatial scales along their distributional range. The conservation and
management of species that inhabit kelp forests will benefit from the combined
knowledge of connectivity among populations across the California and Baja California
border, and from understanding its seasonal and annual variability (DiBacco et al. 2006;
Le Corre et al. 2012).

Allelic diversity.- the actual number of alleles present at a locus, the specific location or
position of a gene's DNA sequence, on a chromosome.
Aragonite.- a mineral consisting of calcium carbonate, typically occurring in white
seashells
Conspicuous fish.- fish species that are clearly visible and attract the attention for size
and/or color.
Cryptic fish.- classification of fish species that for its size, color (camouflage) or behavior
are difficult to notice.
Ecosystem engineer.- is any organism that creates, significantly modifies, maintains or
destroys a habitat. These organisms can have a large impact on the species
richness and landscape-level heterogeneity of an area.
Genetic bottleneck.- is a sharp reduction in the size of a population due to environmental
events (such as earthquakes, floods, fires, disease, or droughts)
Hypoxia.- oxygen deficiency in a biotic environment.
Ocean acidification.- Ocean acidification is the decline in surface seawater pH caused by
the sustained absorption of anthropogenically-derived atmospheric CO2 (Caldeira
and Wickett 2003).
Oxygen Minimum Zone.- sometimes referred to as the shadow zone, is the zone in which
oxygen saturation in seawater in the ocean is at its lowest. This zone occurs at
depths of about 200 to 1,000 meters, depending on local circumstances.
Pelagic ecosystems.- marine organism that live in the water column of coastal and ocean
but not on or near the bottom of the sea. They can be contrasted with demersal
fish, which live on or near the bottom, and reef fish, which are associated with
coral reefs.
Resilience.- was defined as the amount of disturbance that an ecosystem could withstand
without changing self-organized processes and structures (defined as alternative
stable states).
Sessile invertebrates.- Organisms that usually live on a substrate without the ability to
move
Top-down control.- refers to when a top predator controls the structure or population
dynamics of the ecosystem. The classic example is of kelp forest ecosystems. In
such ecosystems, sea otters are a keystone predator. They prey on urchins which
in turn eat kelp.