We took advantage of regional differences in environmental forcing and consumer abundance to examine the relative importance of nutrient availability (bottom-up), grazing pressure (top-down), and storm waves (disturbance) in determining the standing biomass and net primary production (NPP) of the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera in central and southern California. Using a nine-year data set collected from 17 sites we show that, despite high densities of sea urchin grazers and prolonged periods of low nutrient availability in southern California, NPP by giant kelp was twice that of central California where nutrient concentrations were consistently high and sea urchins were nearly absent due to predation by sea otters. Waves associated with winter storms were consistently higher in central California, and the loss of kelp biomass to winter wave disturbance was on average twice that of southern California. These observations suggest that the more intense wave disturbance in central California limited NPP by giant kelp under otherwise favorable conditions. Regional patterns of interannual variation in NPP were similar to those of wave disturbance in that year-to-year variation in disturbance and NPP were both greater in southern California. Our findings provide strong evidence that regional differences in wave disturbance overwhelmed those of nutrient supply and grazing intensity to determine NPP by giant kelp. The important role of disturbance in controlling NPP revealed by our study is likely not unique to giant kelp forests, as vegetation dynamics in many systems are dominated by post-disturbance succession with climax communities being relatively uncommon. The effects of disturbance frequency may be easier to detect in giant kelp because it is fast growing and relatively short lived, with cycles of disturbance and recovery occurring on time scales of years. Much longer data sets (decades to centuries) will likely be needed to properly evaluate the role of disturbance relative to other processes in determining patterns of NPP in other systems.

With few exceptions primary production derived from photosynthesis fuels the energy demands of higher trophic levels and plays a key role in virtually all ecosystem processes. Not surprisingly, scientists have been interested in patterns of primary production and the factors that control them since the time of Aristotle (Lieth 1973). At the most basic level primary production is controlled by characteristic features of the physical environment (e.g., temperature, pH, and soil type) that determine how well plants can survive in a particular locale. Once these basic requirements are met, the availability of resources (e.g., light, nutrients, and water) dictates how fast plants grow. In the absence of disturbance, these factors determine the standing biomass of actively growing vegetation, and ultimately the amount of material fixed by photosynthesis that becomes available to higher trophic levels (Rosensweig 1968, Webb et al. 1983).

Coexisting with this bottom-up flow of primary production driven by the abiotic environment are topdown consumptive forces that alter producer biomass (Hairston et al. 1960, Terborgh and Estes 2010). Primary producers are consumed by grazers, which in turn are fed upon by their predators. When such trophic interactions are strong the balance between predators and grazers can effectively determine the amount and type of plant biomass and resulting levels of primary production (Pace et al. 1999, Terborgh et al. 2010). Superimposed upon these bottom-up processes and topdown forces are various forms of physical disturbance that alter the biomass of producers and consumers to varying degrees depending on the type of disturbance and the structure of the community prior to its occurrence (Sousa 1984, Pickett and White 1985). There has been much discussion and debate over the relative importance of resource availability (bottom-up), consumer pressure (top-down), and disturbance in controlling the structure and dynamics of natural communities (Connell 1978, Matson and Hunter 1992, Polis 1999). Perhaps nowhere has this debate been more ardent than in discussions of shallow benthic marine systems dominated by large kelps (e.g., Jackson et al. 2001, Foster et al. 2006, Halpern et al. 2006, Steele et al. 2006, Foster and Schiel 2010). The notable discovery by Estes and Palmisano (1974) that kelp forests in the Aleutian Islands are largely controlled by sea otter foraging was followed by reports of trophic cascades and strong top-down control in other kelp forest systems (Mann 1977, Shears and Babcock 2002, Lafferty 2004). 

By contrast, the unprecedented ENSO events of the 1980s and 1990s served to heighten an awareness of nutrient limitation and storm disturbance as important drivers of kelp forest structure (Dayton and Tegner 1989) and led to subsequent studies that argued for the primacy of larger scale bottom-up oceanographic processes in controlling kelp biomass and production (Dayton et al. 1999, Broitman and Kinlan 2006 ). Notwithstanding these arguments, Reed et al. (2008) found that variation in biomass and NPP of giant kelp in southern California was most readily explained by wave disturbance, possibly because of an absence of nutrient poor El Nin˜o conditions in the region and period studied.

There is wide acknowledgement that biotic and abiotic forces act simultaneously to influence populations and communities and that the critical challenge for ecologists is to measure the relative strengths and interactions of these forces as a means of explaining the distribution and abundance of species in nature (Hunter and Price 1992). This has proven to be problematic for many systems due to the difficulty of mimicking natural disturbances and manipulating resources and large predators at the spatial scales appropriate for testing meaningful hypotheses. Regional comparisons and natural experiments have been advocated as an effective means for overcoming these challenges (Menge 2000, Terborgh and Estes 2010, Wernberg et al. 2010). In the kelp forest, manipulating even one of the potential controls of NPP in a realistic way is a huge challenge; there are legal and logistical challenges to transplanting sea otters and other large predators, spatial and temporal patterns of nutrient delivery are difficult to simulate, and the powerful water movements associated with large waves cannot be reproduced on the scale of a kelp forest. A regional comparison is the most (or perhaps only) practical approach to examining the relative importance of these three factors.

Here we make use of known regional differences in environmental forcing and predator abundance in California kelp forests (Graham et al. 2008) to examine the relative importance of grazing pressure (top-down), nutrient availability (bottom-up), and storm waves (disturbance) on the standing biomass and net primary production of the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera, which is the dominant biomass producer of kelp forests in this region (Foster and Schiel 1985, Graham et al. 2007). We use time series data to show that there are consistent differences in grazers, nutrients and waves between central and southern California. These differences indicate that top-down control should cause reefs in central California to support more kelp biomass and higher production than reefs in southern California because of the near absence of sea urchin grazers in central California due to the presence of sea otters. Bottom-up control should also lead to more kelp in central California due to kelp’s rapid growth in the cold, nutrient rich waters of central California, and slower growth on the more oligotrophic reefs of southern California. Surprisingly, we found that patterns of kelp biomass and production did not match either of these predictions. Using a nine-year time series of net primary production (NPP) by giant kelp at long-term study sites in southern and central California we show that NPP was consistently lower in central California, apparently because the more intense wave disturbance on the central coast overwhelmed top-down and bottom-up forces.

Because giant kelp fronds in central and southern California are similar in size, the density of fronds is considered to be a good predictor of biomass density of giant kelp throughout central and southern California (reviewed in North 1994). Frond density is also a good predictor of NPP in giant kelp, especially when it is measured in the summer (Reed et al. 2009). In this paper, we applied the relationships between frond density in a given month and annual NPP generated by Reed et al. (2009) to data on frond densities measured in summer to determine annual NPP by giant kelp at each of our study sites for each year of the study.

We then calculated the interannual variation in NPP (as estimated by the among year coefficient of variation). The relationships between frond density and NPP developed by Reed et al. (2009) were derived from data collected at only three of our 17 study sites (Arroyo Burro, Arroyo Quemado, and Mohawk in the Santa Barbara Channel). These relationships, however, are expected to apply equally well across all our sites because (1) frond density is a good predictor of biomass density across the geographic range of our study (North 1994) and (2) seasonality in the main biological processes contributing to primary production by giant kelp (i.e., recruitment, growth, and biomass loss) is similar in central and southern California (Gerard 1976, Graham et al. 1997, Reed et al. 2008). We used t tests to evaluate potential regional differences in the mean and interannual variation in giant kelp NPP (n ¼ 9 years for each region). Data were log-transformed to meet the assumption of equality of variances.

Because giant kelp fronds in central and southern California are similar in size, the density of fronds is considered to be a good predictor of biomass density of giant kelp throughout its range, but particularly in the more southern regions (Dayton and Tegner 1989, Edwards and Estes 2006). Although these stressful conditions are well documented, they are short-lived (; 2 years) and relatively rare (there were only three strong El Nin˜os that had a sustained impact on giant kelp in southern California during the period 1930– 2000; Foster and Schiel 2010). Hence, the nutrient stresses experienced by giant kelp during our study were typical for southern California, even though they did not attain the maximum stress that can occur. Despite our observations of strong locally imposed grazing pressure and the seasonally oligotrophic conditions in southern California, we found that NPP by giant kelp at our southern sites was on average twice that of our central California sites. The dominating influence of wave disturbance on giant kelp is due in large part to its massive growth form; it extends throughout the water column with the majority of its biomass residing in the canopy at the sea surface. This morphology creates tremendous drag that makes fronds and entire plants highly susceptible to removal by wave-induced water motion. Not all kelp forests are dominated by species with floating canopies and the importance of wave disturbance relative to topdown and bottom-up processes almost certainly varies among kelp forest systems due to differences in their susceptibility to disturbance, grazing, and nutrient limitation.

Our analysis concerned NPP by giant kelp, and so did not account for all sources of NPP on these reefs. In particular, we did not consider primary production by understory species of macroalgae, which are also present in most giant kelp forests. The low profile of these species makes them less vulnerable to wave disturbances that remove giant kelp and less susceptible to nutrient limitation due to higher concentrations of nutrients near the bottom (Dayton et al. 1999). These characteristics allow understory macroalgae to compensate in part for the seasonal reduction in NPP caused by the loss of giant kelp to winter waves (Miller et al. 2011). The understory assemblages of central California kelp forests consist largely of perennial species, which raises the possibility that the intra-regional patterns in NPP reported here for giant kelp may differ from those for the entire kelp forest ecosystem.

While other species of macroalgae may compensate in part for the loss of primary production resulting from the removal of Macrocystis they cannot replace its ecological role as a foundation species (reviewed in Foster and Schiel 1985, Graham et al. 2007). Giant kelp provides structural habitat to a diverse community of organisms, most of which do not depend directly on it for food (Graham 2004, Graham et al. 2008). Recent studies show that the frequency at which giant kelp is removed by wave disturbance is a primary determinant of the diversity and complexity of the kelp forest food web (Byrnes et al. 2011). Thus disturbances affecting foundation species such as giant kelp are likely to have impacts that cascade through entire ecosystems. The important role of physical disturbance in controlling vegetative biomass, NPP and the structure of the resulting ecosystem is by no means restricted to giant kelp forests. Mechanical damage and sedimentation associated with floods is an important control of vegetative biomass in streams (Peterson and Stevenson1992, Biggs 1996) and riparian habitats (Stromberg et al. 1997, Cavalcanti and Lockably 2006), while fire, hurricanes, and avalanches greatly alter the landscape and productivity of terrestrial forests (Veblen et al. 1994, Lugo and Scatena 1996). Vegetation dynamics in these and other systems are dominated by post disturbance succession (Sousa 1984, Pickett and White 1985), which can have profound consequences for NPP (Scatena et al. 1996, Miller et al. 2011). The extent to which spatial and temporal patterns of NPP are controlled by physical disturbance depends on the frequency and intensity of disturbance events relative to recovery time for the dominant vegetation and resource availability, grazing pressure and the direct and indirect effects of the disturbance on these factors (Biggs 1996, Reed et al. 2008). Our results highlight the need expressed by others (Dayton and Tegner 1984, Menge and Olson 1990) to account for the spatial and temporal scales over which different biotic and abiotic processes operate and to integrate their respective roles when assessing the causes of observed patterns of variation. The physical and biological characteristics of many systems dictate that long-term (decades to centuries), spatially extensive data be used to evaluate the importance of disturbance in accounting for variation in NPP and community structure relative to that of other factors. More generally, our results highlight the role of physical disturbance in structuring natural communities.

Studies of kelp forests have more often focused on the relative importance of top-down and bottom-up forces. Here we have shown that physical disturbance is more important than either of these processes in explaining regional differences in the biomass and productivity of giant kelp in California. Physical disturbance is likely to play a similar role in other systems. This role is evolving as many sources of physical disturbance are expected to be affected by climate change; storms, floods, and fires have all been predicted to change in frequency or intensity (Webster et al. 2005, Flannigan et al. 2006, Lehner et al. 2006). If physical disturbances become more frequent or intense as often predicted, then disturbances may begin to limit NPP even in systems where they had previously been less important, with profound consequences for the global carbon cycle (Peng and Apps 1999). Regardless of such predicted changes, understanding when and where physical disturbance overwhelms other factors will help us to explain and predict NPP, vegetative biomass, and the myriad of ecosystem properties that depend on them.

Our study demonstrates the potential for physical disturbance to overwhelm the effects of top-down and bottom up forces in determining NPP. Patterns of NPP by giant kelp in southern and central California were best explained by inter-regional differences in wave disturbance, and run counter to the patterns that would be expected if grazing by urchins or availability of nutrients controlled NPP. These results are consistent with our earlier findings that wave disturbance from winter storms was a major determinant of giant kelp biomass in southern California and that the effects of wave disturbance on biomass explained much more of the year-to-year variation in giant kelp NPP than did variation in kelp growth rates (Reed et al. 2008). Our results do not imply that grazing and nutrient limitation are unimportant in California kelp forests.