Offshore aquaculture of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) has been proposed by the US Department of Energy for large scale biofuel production along the west coast of California. The Southern Californian Bight provides an ideal area for offshore kelp aquaculture as the upwelling and advection of cool, nutrient-rich waters supports the growth of vast native giant kelp populations. However, concentrations of nutrients vary greatly across space, can be limiting for kelp growth over seasonal to interannual time scales, and inputs of nutrients to surface waters may be subject to local circulation processes. Therefore, it is important to understand both the spatiotemporal variability of seawater nitrate concentrations and the appropriate scale of observation in order for offshore kelp aquaculture to be successful. Here, Snyder et. al (2020) use a combination of satellite sea surface temperature imagery, in situ measurements, and modeling to determine seawater nitrate fields across multiple spatial and temporal scales. Snyder et. al (2020) then combine this information with known giant kelp physiological traits to develop a kelp stress index (KSI) for the optimal siting of offshore kelp aquaculture over seasonal to decadal scales. Temperature to nitrate relationships were determined from in situ measurements using generalized additive models and validated with buoy data. Summer and winter relationships were significantly different, and satellite-derived products compared well to buoy validations. Surface nitrate patterns, as derived from satellite temperature products, reveal the spatial variability in nitrate concentrations, and indicate areas that that may cause nutrient stress seasonally and during the negative phase of the North Pacific Gyre Oscillation. As the spatial scale of the surface nitrate product decreased, the negative bias increased and fine scale spatial variability was lost. Similarly, the averaging of daily nitrate concentration determinations over longer time scales increased the negative bias. Snyder et. al (2020) found that daily, 1 km spatial resolution nitrate products were most sufficient for identifying localized upwelling and areas of consistently high surface nitrate concentrations, and that areas in the northern and western-most portions of the Southern California Bight are the most suitable for sustained offshore kelp aquaculture.

Satellite remote sensing allows for the daily determination of global sea surface temperature (SST), which can be used to estimate nutrient concentrations in the surface water via empirical temperature to nutrient relationships. Over the last fSnyder et. al (2020) decades, the rapid increase in global satellite missions and freely available satellite-based data products have led to spatially explicit seawater nutrient estimates in many regions. Early work by Kamykowski and Zentara (1986) modeled temperature to nutrient relationships globally using in situ temperature, nitrate, phosphate, and silicic acid measurements for use with Coastal Zone Color Scanner SST imagery. Others have built upon this technique to include additional nutrients for marine flora and established time series over large spatial extents in various regions (Sathyendranath et al., 1991; Morin et al., 1993; Dugdale et al., 1997; Kamykowski et al., 2002; Son et al., 2006). The more recently launched Landsat 8 Operational Land Imager has the capability to monitor surface temperatures at a finer spatial resolution than traditional ocean observing satellites. Landsat 8 imagery is particularly useful for work in coastal environments because the thermal infrared sensor (TIRS) has a high signal to-noise ratio and 100-m spatial resolution. High-resolution SST from Landsat 8 can be accurately determined after accounting for atmospheric effects using coincident satellite imagery and have been used to aid in the siting of aquaculture, such as oyster farms in Maine (Snyder et al., 2017).

Recently, the United States Department of Energy has invested in research to develop offshore giant kelp aquaculture farms for the production of biofuels and other products (e.g., fertilizer, animal feed, and chemicals). Thus, a temporospatial knowledge of nutrient availability in these often nutrient-poor offshore waters is required. The floating kelp canopy exists at the sea surface, so while nutrients at depth may fluctuate depending on seasonal stratification, year-round estimations of SST should be sufficient for this application. Seawater nitrate concentration is strongly and inversely related to seawater temperature in regions influenced by coastal upwelling and empirical temperature to nitrate relationships (T2N) have been developed for this region (Eppley et al., 1979; Dugdale et al., 1997; Kim and Miller, 2007; McPhee-Shaw et al., 2007; Omand et al., 2012; Jacox et al., 2015) to study ocean dynamics and biophysical interactions in a variety of ecosystems (Kamykowski and Zentara, 1986; Kamykowski et al., 2002; Edwards and Estes, 2006; Fram et al., 2008; Stewart et al., 2009).

The growth, distribution, and lifespan of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) fluctuates due to multiple environmental drivers, such as wave disturbance, temperature, nutrients, light availability, and herbivory (Gerard, 1982a; Graham et al., 2007; Parnell et al., 2010; Bell et al., 2015a). The spatial and temporal variability of these drivers must be quantified to optimize the spatial planning of these large-scale, offshore kelp aquaculture operations (Gentry et al., 2017; Lester et al., 2018). Two of these physical parameters, seawater temperature and nutrient concentration, are particularly relevant as upwelling processes deliver cool, nutrient-rich water to the surface and fuel giant kelp growth, while water temperatures >23◦C can lead to severe reductions in canopy biomass (Zimmerman and Kremer, 1984; Deysher and Dean, 1986; Cavanaugh et al., 2019). The upwelling and advection of nutrient-rich seawater to the surface varies greatly across space and through time and is associated with seasonal to interannual fluctuations in giant kelp abundance over local to regional scales (Bell et al., 2015a). Ambient seawater nitrate accounts for a large portion of readily available inorganic nutrients and is a necessary ion for tissue building and photosynthesis, where frond elongation rate declines dramatically when nitrate concentrations are <1 µmol L−1 (Zimmerman and Kremer, 1984; Rodriguez et al., 2016). While seawater nitrate concentration is closely related to kelp frond elongation and biomass accumulation in natural kelp forest systems (Zimmerman and Kremer, 1984; Bell et al., 2018), other forms of nitrogen, such as ammonia and urea, have been proposed for the maintenance of photosynthetic processes during periods of low nitrate availability (Brzezinski et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2018). However, the benthic sources of these reduced forms of nitrogen (Brzezinski et al., 2013; Burkepile et al., 2013; Peters et al., 2019) suggest they will be less important in offshore areas. Furthermore, while kelp can absorb nitrogen throughout the water column, the photosynthetic condition of the canopy is strongly related to seawater nitrate concentrations at the surface (Fram et al., 2008; Konotchick et al., 2012; Bell et al., 2018; Bell and Siegel, in review). Since the surface canopy exists in a high light environment and provides the largest contribution to production, the assessment of surface seawater nitrate concentration is an essential first step in the aquaculture siting process (Colombo-Pallotta et al., 2006).

Since seawater nutrient concentrations are dynamic and can be limiting for kelp forest growth, this variability across space and through time needs to be well understood if offshore kelp aquaculture is to be successful. It is also necessary to understand the appropriate spatial and temporal scale to observe these nutrient dynamics, as local circulation processes may play a critical role in nutrient delivery to aquaculture farms. This is especially important as aquaculture farms are usually on the scale of 10’s to 100’s of meters and may be subject to processes operating over a variety of scales. Larger spatial and longer temporal resolution satellite data products may mask smaller scale nutrient inputs that may be important to kelp growth in proposed offshore aquaculture areas. Since T2N relationships tend to be non-linear, the mean seawater temperature state across several days or over several kilometers may lead to a vastly different estimate of mean nitrate concentration when compared to estimates determined from sensors with increased temporal or spatial resolution. With the numerous spatial and temporal scale SST products available to the aquaculture community, a quantification of error associated with changes in spatial/temporal resolution is necessary. In order to determine the optimal spatial and temporal scale to observe seawater nitrate dynamics for use with offshore kelp aquaculture, Snyder et. al (2020) (1) used high spatial resolution (100 m) SST imagery from Landsat 8 to quantify the error associated with determining nitrate concentrations at several common spatial resolutions, (2) determined the error associated with averaging temperature data across various temporal scales, and (3) determined the optimal spatial/temporal scale of observation and combined these analyses with known kelp physiological traits to develop a kelp stress index (KSI) to aid in a siting analysis of offshore kelp farms in the Southern California Bight.

Estimated surface nitrate concentration imagery show seasonal means that follow expectations for the Southern California Bight (Figure 11). Spring upwelling leads to elevated nitrate concentrations, especially in the northern and western halves of the study area. The SE quadrant of the study area can have less than 1 µmol L−1 nitrate in surface waters for much of the year; and with CV’s of around 2, this area shows a great degree of variability through time. For kelp aquaculture, and especially farms fixed to the seafloor, areas with more stable nutrient conditions (both seasonally and interannually, i.e., the northern and western areas) should lead to more stable aquaculture production and should be considered in spatial planning analyses (Gentry et al., 2017; Lester et al., 2018). The Santa Barbara Channel is uniquely protected from exposure to wave action and high-resolution thermal imagery could be especially useful for identifying areas with nutrient concentrations high enough to support year-round kelp growth (Cabral et al., 2016).

The analysis of the KSI (i.e., fraction of days with kelp nutrient stress) shows that much of the study area is not under potential nitrate stress for the winter and spring seasons (Figure 12). During summer and fall the northern half of the study area can still display low kelp nutrient stress, but low nutrient surface waters dominate during summer in the SE quadrant and as they flow into the Santa Barbara Channel from the east and increase nutrient stress (Harms and Winant, 1994; Otero and Siegel, 2004). There are areas in the Southern California Bight that maintain less than ideal conditions for kelp growth (mean nitrate concentration stays below 1 µmol L−1 nitrate as indicated by the white contSnyder et. al (2020) line in Figure 11). Nevertheless, there are kelp forests that occur for periods of several years in the SE quadrant of the map despite a high average KSI, for example, along the coast of San Diego, CA.

By incorporating decadal forcing like NPGO into the siting analysis Snyder et. al (2020) found valuable information that may have otherwise been missed by the averaged data through time. When the NPGO was positive, areas in the southern portion of the study area increased in their proportion of time with adequate nutrients for kelp growth, especially in the winter and spring. In fact, the NPGO is an important interannual driver of kelp canopy biomass dynamics along the California coast and natural kelp forests in these southern areas may only form canopies during positive NPGO years (Parnell et al., 2010; Cavanaugh et al., 2011; Bell et al., 2015a). It follows that engineered kelp farms planted in areas that typically experience low nitrate conditions may only be successful during high NPGO periods. Snyder et. al (2020) can learn from the dynamics of natural kelp systems in these low nitrate areas, especially if planned aquaculture requires that no external fertilizers are applied. The KSI is modulated by factors other than mean seasonal temperature and nutrient concentrations, so it is helpful to consider low frequency marine climate oscillations, like the NPGO, that may allow kelp to persist (Di Lorenzo et al., 2008). In the Santa Barbara Channel the KSI never exceeds 0.5, except in the Summer and Fall seasons near the eastern section and along the mainland coast. This highlights the western Santa Barbara Channel as an ideal site for maintaining kelp growth at the surface in offshore aquaculture during both negative and positive NPGO years.

It is important to note that this study only covers nitrate concentrations at the surface, and stratification and internal waves may be responsible for translocation of nutrients at depth (Zimmerman and Kremer, 1984; McPhee-Shaw et al., 2007). Despite this, Snyder et. al (2020) know that kelp canopy health declines when surface waters warm and nitrate decreases, both seasonally and during marine heatwaves, and thus surface waters are very important to monitor for kelp canopy condition and growth (Bell et al., 2018; Cavanaugh et al., 2019). While the spatial resolution of the MODIS 1 km product adequately captures surface patterns of SST and nitrate, it is important to note that the temporal resolution of satellite imagery only provides a snapshot of conditions at a single moment during the day. As such, this daily measurement likely misses oceanographic events, some of which could be especially important for supporting kelp growth. Internal waves are strong at 12 h periods and drive influxes of upwelled water into the Santa Barbara Channel, so for siting purposes it would be advantageous to collect continuous or hourly measurements with moored sensors that can capture these events and supplement satellite datasets (Zimmerman and Kremer, 1984).

These maps do not directly identify the best overall areas to site a kelp farm, but they do offer spatially and temporally explicit information to help with the decision-making process, as several factors will come into play depending on farm design, permitting, economic forces, and environmental impacts. As a foundation species and ecosystem engineer, giant kelp serves as a habitat for bryozoans, bacterial colonies, fishes etc, and floating kelp farms in the open ocean could have positive and/or negative effects on surrounding ecosystems by modulating local nutrient availability. Rather than solely rely on nitrate concentration, it is better to map how the organism of interest will respond to these nutrient dynamics. Maps of nutrient stress periods show areas where kelp production may suffer seasonally. Sainz et al. (2019) showed that bivalve aquaculture is also expected to do poorly in the Southern aquaculture could shift to other products during negative periods of the NPGO.

One-kilometer MODIS satellite retrievals performed well for SST and nitrate dynamics as seen in validation data by continuous buoy measurements in both cool and warm areas of the Southern California Bight (Table 1). The increased magnitude of MAE and ME of estimated nitrate concentrations in the West Santa Barbara buoy were likely caused by the higher magnitudes of nitrate at that site relative to the Santa Monica Basin site. As part of the temporal scaling analysis, higher values in MAE were due to the higher fraction of cloud contaminated daily SST estimates as opposed to the increase in temporal scale (Figure 10). Offshore areas to the west of the Channel Islands and Pt. Conception are generally cloudier than areas inside the Channel Islands (Supplementary Figures S2A,B), and overcast and cloudy conditions often persist throughout the summer and fall seasons over the Santa Barbara Channel. This makes it difficult to build an accurate climatology, as clear imagery are sometimes only available once or twice per week. Snyder et. al (2020) see that as new satellites come online, such as VIIRS in 2012, the increased number of passes allows at least one sensor to get a clear image of daily SST more often. The future launch of Landsat 9, scheduled for 2020, promises an improved TIRS-2 sensor that will reduce stray light issues in Landsat 8’s thermal imagery, as well as increase global coverage and data collection. Improvements in future satellite missions, the addition of geostationary satellites, and greater cooperation between global space agencies will continue to mitigate this limitation (Castelao et al., 2006). For areas with persistent cloud cover and frequent storms (and thus lower SST and possibly higher nitrate concentrations) in situ monitoring will be necessary for farmers and stakeholders to observe local conditions.

On the contrary, increases in the ME are driven mostly by increases in temporal averaging and not cloud contamination. It is important to note that ME is always negative and becomes more negative as temporal scale (the averaging of daily SST determinations) increases. Snyder et. al (2020) cannot control the level of cloud contamination, but Snyder et. al (2020) can control the temporal scale at which Snyder et. al (2020) convert SST to nitrate concentrations. Snyder et. al (2020) would recommend that each daily determination of SST is converted to nitrate before averaging over time (Figure 2).

It is important to understand the implications of spatial and temporal scale of temperature data when estimating seawater nutrient fields for assessing the suitability of kelp aquaculture sites. Snyder et. al (2020) found that daily, 1 km SST imagery does an adequate job of replicating continuous buoy measurements. For studies in the NE Pacific, a merged daily 1 km multi-satellite product, like the one used in this study, captures a great deal of the variability in temperature and nitrate concentration in this system at a fine spatial and temporal scale. It is also important to remember that SST does not estimate temperature dynamics below the surface of the water, and that waters can be stratified in the summer. This stratification may hide subsurface dynamics of seawater nutrients. Future offshore aquaculture farms may use technology to overcome this, like farms which can alter buoyancy to sink below a nutricline or employ the use of artificial upwelling devices.

